The Project Gutenberg EBook of Das Heim und die Welt, by Rabindranath Tagore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The home and the world

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Translator: Helene Meyer-Franck

Release Date: July 25, 2016 [EBook # 52643]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOME AND THE WORLD ***




Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Matthias Grammel and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                           RABINDRANATH TAGORE

                               COLLECTED
                                  WORKS


                              SIXTH VOLUME


                          THE HOME AND THE WORLD

                                    *


                                 MUNICH
                            KURT WOLFF VERLAG




                           RABINDRANATH TAGORE

                                THE HOME
                              AND THE WORLD

                                  NOVEL

                                    *


                                 MUNICH
                            KURT WOLFF VERLAG




 Only authorized German edition. After that of Rabindranath Tagore
 self-organized English edition translated into German by
 Helene Meyer-Franck


             Copyright 1920 by Kurt Wolff Verlag in Munich




THE HOME AND THE WORLD




FIRST CHAPTER


BIMALA'S STORY

I.

Mother, today I see your red one again in front of my mind
Forehead sign [1], the sari [2] you used to wear with his
broad, red hem, and your wonderful eyes full of depth and
Peace. At the beginning of my life they came like the first light of the
dusk in the morning and gave me gold supplies to take with me on the way.

My mother's face was dark, but it had one
Halo, and its beauty put all the vanity of the beautiful to shame.


Everyone says I look like my mother. In my childhood
I didn't want to hear this at all. I felt that God
would have unjustly put a cover around my limbs - that mine
dark countenance didn’t really belong to me, but because of somebody else
Would have happened to me by mistake. Everything I consider from God
Compensation for it was that I could get the ideal figure
a woman would like to grow up, like the great heroic poems
describe.

When the marriage proposal came for me, the accompanying astrologer checked
the palm of my hand and said, “This girl has good marks. she will
to become an ideal wife. "

And all the women who heard it said, “It's no wonder, because she
is like her mother. "

I was married to a rajah [3]. As a child I was very familiar
with the descriptions of Prince Charming. But my husband's face
it wasn't as if the imagination would transplant him to fairyland.
It was dark, as dark as mine. The feeling of shyness that I have
because of my lack of physical beauty, gave way to it
something; but at the same time I felt a faint regret in my heart.

But when our face evades the scrutinizing gaze of the senses and turns
saves to the sanctuary of the heart, there it can forget itself. I
remember from my childhood experience how devoted love can die
Beauty itself is seen from within. When my mother
various fruits that she herself with her loving hands
had carefully peeled, arranged on the white stone plate and gently
waved the fan to scare away the flies while mine
Father sat at the meal, her serving love poured out in a beauty,
which was about all external shape. Even in my early childhood I could
I feel the power of this beauty. She was above all words
and doubts and calculations, it was all music.

I still clearly remember how I was after my marriage on
Tomorrow gently and quietly used to get up at my husband's feet
to touch reverently [4] without waking him, and like me in
such moments was as if the red mark on my forehead was like
the morning star shone.

One day he accidentally woke up and asked me, smiling, “What is it
that, Bimala? What are you doing there? "

I will never forget how ashamed I was that he caught me
would have. He could possibly think that I was trying to secretly mine
to acquire a merit. But no no! This had nothing to do with
To do merit. It was my woman's heart that had to adore when it did
should love.

My father-in-law's house was one of the most respected since
Times of the Pâdishâhs [5]. In part it still adhered to the old Indian
Laws of Manus and Parashars, partly Mongolian and
Afghan customs naturalized with him. But my husband was quite
modern. He was the first from his home to go to university
and got his master’s degree. His eldest brother was devoted to drinking
and died young without leaving children. My husband didn't drink
and had no tendency to debauchery. That abstinence was that
The family was so strange that to many it hardly seemed proper. You were the one
Belief that abstinence is only for those who are not of happiness
are favored. Because the moon has room for spots, not the stars.

My husband's parents were long dead, and his old one
Grandmother was the mistress of the house. My husband was the apple of her eye, you
greatest gem. And so he never got into trouble when he
did not adhere to the old customs.

When he brought Miss Gilby into the house to teach me and me
Keeping company, he got his way, in spite of the
chatty, poisonous tongues at home and outside.

My husband had just passed his first academic exam at the time
and prepared for the second; therefore he had to live in Calcutta
and listen to lectures at the university. He used to treat me every day
write just a few simple lines, but its boldly curved,
characterful handwriting looked at me, oh, so tenderly! I
kept his letters in a box of sandalwood and covered it
every day with fresh flowers from the garden.

At that time the image of the prince from the fairy tale had already faded like that
Moon in the light of the morning. The prince was now enthroned in my heart
my real world. I was his queen. I had my place
his side. But my greatest happiness was that my true
There was space at his feet.

In the meantime I am and have been introduced to the spirit of modern times
learned to speak his language. Hence, it seems to me as if this
simple words that I am now writing here blushed with shame.
Apart from my acquaintance with the modern way of life
my natural feeling tell me that as it is not of my will
depended that I came into this world as a woman, so did it
Devotional ability in a woman's love cannot be learned how
a hackneyed passage from a romantic poetry that a
Schoolgirl writes reverently in her exercise book in beautiful circular letters.

But my husband never gave me an opportunity to show my admiration for him.
That was just his size. They are weaklings from their wives
to demand unconditional surrender as their right; that's a humiliation for
both.

His love for me seemed to surpass mine in me
showered with homage and riches. But I had more that
Need to give than to receive; because love does not want to be spared
and be protected: she is a tramp whose flowers are better in the
Dust of the street than in the crystal vases of the drawing room
thrive.

My husband couldn't quite get on with the old, traditional habits
break that ruled in our family. So it was hard for us
to see us at any hour of the day [6]. I knew exactly that
Time when he could come to me, and that's how we were always together
prepared with loving care. It came out like the rhyme of a poem
in a regular step of the rhythm.

When I have finished my day's work and taken my bath in the afternoon
I pinned up my hair, renewed the red forehead mark and
put on my carefully pleated sari and then after I myself
had freed physically and mentally from all domestic duties,
At this particular festive hour I devoted myself entirely to the One.
The time with him every day was short, and yet it was infinite.

My husband used to say that husband and wife were equal in hers
Love because they have equal rights to each other. I contradicted him
not, but my heart told me that love is in two people
Reality is never on the same level; only highlights the higher in that
Being together up to the other at the same height. Hence there is constant rule
the joy of higher love; it never sinks to the level of the mean
Everyday life down.

My beloved, it was worthy of you that you never adore me
expected. But if you had suffered it, you would have been in me
Truth done a service. You showed me your love by
adorned me, trained me by giving me everything for what
I asked you and what I did not ask of you. I saw the depth of yours
Love in your eyes when you look at me I have the secret one
Seen sighs of pain that you suppressed for love for me.
You loved my body like it was a flower from paradise.
You loved my whole being as if Providence made it rare for you
Gabe would have entrusted.

This lavish love made me proud and made me believe
that the wealth that drew you to my door was all mine. But
such vanity only stifles the flow of free devotion in love
of a woman. When I am enthroned as queen and demand homage, so
this demand grows constantly, it is never satisfied. Can a woman
Find their true happiness in the mere awareness that they have power over
has a man? The woman's only salvation is to show her pride in love
to give up.

I have to think of it today, as then, in those days of our happiness,
the flames of envy sprang up around us. This was only natural;
I was lucky by sheer coincidence and without my merit
came. But Providence does not leave the fountain of happiness endless
flow when the debt of honor doesn't keep coming back some long day
paid through and thus the possession of happiness is secured. God
gives us gifts, but the strength to understand them and
we must hold on to it ourselves. Oh, the gifts, the unworthy
Hands slip away!

Both my husband's mother and grandmother were because of her
Beauty been famous. And my widowed sister-in-law was also from
rare beauty. When fate left her so lonely for it,
the grandmother vowed never to ask that her only grandson be with
his marriage would look to beauty. Only the auspicious signs
got me into this family; - otherwise I had
not entitled to be here.

In this house of luxury, few of his wives were theirs
due respect has been given. However, they had adhered to the species
and wise the family got used to it and managed to put their heads over
To hold water borne by her dignity as princesses of an old man
House, even if her tears are drowned in foaming wine and you
Crying was drowned out by the clinking of dancing girls' ankle bracelets.
It was to my credit that my husband did not touch spirits
wasted his manhood in the women's markets? What magic
did I know who tamed the man's wild, unsteady mind? It was
my luck, nothing more. Because that was the case with my sister-in-law
Fate has been very callous. Your feast day was over when it was still
was early in the evening, and the light of their beauty illuminated them in vain
empty halls and burned down after the music had long since died down.

My sister-in-law met my husband's modern views
Contempt. How ridiculous that he should be the family ship with the
all the wealth of his time-honored fame was laden under which
Let such a petty little woman flag sail! How often had to
I feel the scourge of ridicule! »Thief who got the love of one
Stolen spouses, hypocrites who hide under the shamelessness of theirs
Newfangled plaster! «The brightly colored modern robes with which
my husband loved to adorn me, aroused her jealous anger.
"Isn't she ashamed at all to make a shop window out of herself, -
and with their appearance too! "

My husband noticed all this, but his gentleness knew no bounds.
He begged me to forgive her.

I remember once I said to him: “The woman's soul is like this
small and crippled. ”“ Like the feet of Chinese women, ”he replied.
“Hasn't society constrained them to be small and
had to be crippled? You are just a victim of a capricious
Fate. How can you hold them responsible for this? "

My sister-in-law always succeeded in getting anything she wanted from mine
To get husbands. He did not first wonder whether their requests were justified
or would be reasonable. But most of all I was indignant that she even gave him
was not grateful for it. I had promised my husband to be on her
Scold nothing in reply, but that only made me feel bad inside
more on. I felt that goodness has a limit and when you go over this
easily degenerates into weakness. Yes, I should be completely sincere
be? I have often wished that my husband would have manhood
want to be a little less good.

My sister-in-law, Bara Rani [7], was still young and didn't do any
Claim to holiness. On the contrary, had their speeches and jokes
slightly cheeky. Even the young girls she had around
were pretty rude. But no one denied her her way; was this
but the tone to which one was used in the house. What they give me most of all
grudgingly, it seemed to me, happiness was such an impeccable one
To have husbands. However, he was less sensitive to the flaws in her character
than the sadness of their fate.


II

My husband had the ardent desire to get me out of seclusion
to lead my women's chamber out into the world.

One day I said to him: "What do I need the world out there for?"

"The world out there may need you," he replied.

“If she's finished without me for so long, she can do it too
a little longer. Longing for me will not make it perish
walk."

“Oh, she may perish because of me. That's why I don't do any
Concern. I think of myself. "

“Oh really! What is it with you? "

My husband smiled in silence.

I knew his way and immediately resisted it:

“No, no, you won't escape me like that. I need to know what it is. "

"Can everything be said in words?"

“Please stop speaking in riddles! Tell me..."

“What I want is that we shall have our whole life outside in the world as well
shared with each other. Here we both still owe each other something. "

“Is there anything missing in the love we have for one another here at home?
give?"

“Here you are completely absorbed in me. You don't know what you have or what
you miss. "

"I don't like hearing when you talk like that."

“I want you to get out in the middle of it all and
got to know reality. You are not made to do it, just day
to fulfill your domestic chores every day and your whole life in
to spend the drudgery of the household between the narrow walls that
have established traditions around women. Only when we're out in
the world of reality will see and recognize us, our love will be
be perfect and true. "

“If there's anything here that prevents us from fully recognizing ourselves, it can
i don't say anything. But for my part I don't feel anything
is missing."

“Fine, but if the obstacle is only on my side, you should
not help to eliminate it? "

Such conversations were repeated many times. One day he said, “The one
People who long for their stewed fish have in theirs
Greed no remorse when he fish according to his need
cut up. But the one who loves the fish would like to be in the water
please him, and if that is impossible, he waits on the bank, and himself
if he comes home without having seen him, he has it
Comfort to know that the fish is in good hands. Someone in his
To be able to possess perfection is the highest gain, but if this is
is impossible, so is the second highest, on possession in favor of
To renounce the perfection of the other. "

I did not like to hear my husband talk about this subject like that,
but that wasn't the reason why I refused the
To leave the women's quarters. His grandmother was still alive. My
Spouse owned more than ninety-nine percent of the house with that
twentieth century stuffed, much against their taste, but still
she had tolerated it without complaining. It would be tolerated as well
have when the wife of the rajah [8] her seclusion
would have given up. She was even prepared for this to happen
could. But it didn't seem important enough to me to make her this
To inflict pain. I have read in books that we are referred to as “birds in the
Cage «. I don't know how it is with others, but for me
this cage enclosed so much that there was no room in the whole world
- at least that's how I felt at the time.

Grandmother, who was very old, thought very highly of me. Of their
Love was probably based on the idea that with the help of the
Sterne had managed to win my husband's love. Had
don't men naturally tend to sink into vice? None of
the other with all her beauty had been able to do so, her husband
to hold back from being headlong into the infernal abyss
fell, devouring and destroying him. She believed that I did that
Was a means of extinguishing those passions that men
had become so ruinous to her family. Therefore she guarded me like
her greatest treasure and trembled as soon as I lacked the slightest thing.

Grandmother didn't like the clothes and jewelry that she was
my husband bought in European shops to wear. But
she thought: The men have to be some kind of foolish thing
Have a hobby that always costs a lot of money. It has no purpose,
trying to stop them; one can only be happy when she
do not completely ruin themselves in the process. If not my Nikhil always
would be busy dressing his wife with beautiful clothes, who
knows who else he's wasting his money on. So she let
whenever a new dress arrived for me, call my husband and
was happy with him about it.

And so it came about that it was she who changed her taste. Yes you
has been so influenced by the modern mind that no evening goes there
without my telling her stories from English books.

After his grandmother's death, my husband wanted me to be with him
moved to Calcutta. But I couldn't do it
decide. Was this not our house that she suffered in all and
Had troubles under their worries? Wouldn't one
Curse me if I leave and go to town?
This was the thought that held me back as her empty place held me
looked reproachfully. This noble woman was in this house when she was eight
come, and when she died she was seventy-eight. She didn't have one
had a happy life. Fate had arrow after arrow against hers
Chest flung and yet only had more and more the indestructible strength
let their soul flow out. This great house was through her tears
consecrated. What should I be away from him, in the dust of Calcutta?

My husband had the idea that we were mine in this way
Sister-in-law could provide the consolation of being mistress in the house, and
at the same time would give our lives more space to expand.
But that was precisely where I could not agree with him. She gave me that
Made life a plague, she grudged my husband's happiness, and
for that she should be rewarded now! And if we do one day
wanted to return here? I would take first place there
get back?

"What do you want with first place?" My husband used to say. "Gives
Is there nothing more valuable in life? "

Men never understand such things. They have their nests outside
they do not know the full meaning of domestic life. In these
Things they should follow female guidance. - I thought so
back then.

For me the main point was that one had to defend one's rights.
Go away and leave everything in the hands of the enemy, that would be so good
like an admission of defeat.

But why didn't my husband make me go to Calcutta with him?
I know the reason He made no use of his violence, straight
because he had her.


III

When someone gradually fills the gap between day and night
wanted, it would take an eternity to do it. But the sun goes up
up, and the darkness is dispelled - one moment is enough, one
to overcome infinite distance.

One day the new era of the Swadeshi movement began in Bengal [9];
but we had no clear idea of ​​how it came about. It was
no gradual transition from past to present. This is,
I believe the reason the new era floods like a flood over ours
Land came breaking through the dikes, and with it all our cleverness and fear
tearing away. We didn't even have time to think about it
or to understand what had happened or what was supposed to happen.

My heart and senses, my hopes and my desires flared
on in the passion of this new time. Even if so far the
Walls of the home that ultimately means the world to my spirit
had not yet broken, I looked beyond them
into the distance and heard a voice from the distant horizon, her words
I did not understand clearly, but I immediately heard their call
Heart went.

Since the time my husband was studying at university, he had
tries to work so that our people get the things they need in the
own country. There are very many in our area
Date palms. He tried to invent a device with which the juice
squeezed out of the fruit and then boiled into sugar and syrup.
I was told that the machine worked very well, but it still squeezed
even more money from the entrepreneur than juice from the dates. Soon
my husband came to the conclusion that our attempts, our industry
to revive, could not be successful as long as we did not have a bank of our own
had. At that time he tried to introduce me to economics.
That alone wouldn't have done much harm, but he had it
put in his head to teach his compatriots his ideas
and so pave the way for a bank; and then he opened too
actually a small banking business. The high interest rates, however, that
caused the villagers to flock enthusiastically for their money
soon ruined the bank completely.

The old stewards were worried and afraid. The enemy
triumphed. Of the whole family, only my husband's grandmother remained
serene and calm. She scolded me by saying, “Why are you tormenting
him all like that? Do you otherwise care about the fate of the property? How often
I have already seen this property pledged to the tax collector
has been! Are men like women? Men are born
Prodigal and can only make money. Look my child
you should consider yourself lucky that your spouse isn't too
gets through his health! "

The list of those my husband supported was very large
long. Who just got a new loom or a new one
Wanted to invent the travel disguise machine, he stood by until
total ruin. But what annoyed me the most was the way
Sandip Babu exploited him by doing his job for the
Used the Swadeshi movement as a pretext. Whatever it was, be it now
that he should start a newspaper or take a lecture tour for the cause
wanted to undertake, or that he, according to his doctor's opinion
Air change needed, my husband always gave in without asking. And
he granted this to Sandip Babu in addition to the fixed sum that
this regularly received from him for his upkeep. The
The strangest thing about it was that my husband and Sandip Babu were in theirs
Views mismatched.

As soon as the storm of the Swadeshi movement got into my blood as well,
I said to my husband: "I must all my foreign clothes
burn."

"Why do you want to burn them?" He said. “You don't need to
wear as long as you don't want to. "

“As long as I don't want to! My whole life..."

“Well, don't wear them anymore! But why solemn one
Set up a stake? "

"Did you want to hinder me in my decision?"

“What I want to tell you is this: Why don't you want to
try to build up? You shouldn't even do the tenth part, either
waste your strength in this destructive hatred. "

"This hatred will give us the strength to build up."

"It's like saying you couldn't light the house
without lighting it. "

Soon there was a new annoyance. When Miss Gilby came to our house first
there had been great excitement, which then gradually subsided
calmed down as you got used to it. Now the whole thing became of
stirred up again. I hadn't paid attention to whether Miss
Gilby was European or Indian, but now it wasn't me anymore
no matter. I said to my husband, “We have to get Miss Gilby out of the
Get home. "

He was silent.

I became violent and he went away sad.

After crying myself, I was when we met in the evening
see you again, in a somewhat calmer mood. “I can't get through Miss Gilby
to see a fog of abstract theories, "said my husband," only
because she is English. Can you after such a long acquaintance
not get over the barrier of a mere name? Can not you
remember that she loves you? "

I was a little ashamed and answered a little irritably: “For my part
let them stay. I am not anxious to send them away. "

And Miss Gilby stayed.

But one day I heard that a young fellow was on the way to her
Had insulted the church. It was a boy that we supported. My
Husband turned him out of the house. On that day there was none other than mine
Husband could forgive this act - even I couldn't. This time Miss went
Gilby by herself. She cried when she came to bid us farewell,
but my anger didn't melt away. To gossip the poor boy so,
and he was such a splendid boy who was above his enthusiasm
forgot to eat and drink for the national cause.

My husband took Miss Gilby to the train station in his own carriage. I found,
that he went far too far. And as exaggerated rumors about this one
Incident gave rise to a public scandal about which the
When newspapers came up, I thought that had served him quite right.

I was often troubled by what my husband did, but never before
I was ashamed of him; but now I had to blush for him.
I wasn't sure, and I didn't care what the wrong was
poor Noren Miss Gilby had done, or should have done; but how
one could sit in judgment on something like that at such a time! I would have
the attitude that drove the little Noren, the English woman his
To show contempt, not to like to suppress. I couldn't help it
see it as a sign of weakness that my husband has one like that
simple thing did not understand. And so I blushed for him.

And yet it was not the case that my husband refused to do the
To support Swadeshi movement or that he is somehow national
Thing counteracted. He just wasn't able to deal with a whole
Surrender hearts to the spirit of the "Bande Mataram" [10].

"I would like to serve my country with pleasure," said he, "but justice
stands higher to me than the fatherland. Who idolatry with his
Drifts fatherland, calls a curse upon it. "


Footnotes:

[1] The badge of the women's class among the Hindus and that
Symbol of the devoted love that this state includes.

[2] The main garment of Hindu women.

[3] Rajah (Rajah), Indian prince.

[4] This is an outward form of worship and happens
by placing your hand on your feet and then your own
Head lightly touched. It is not a common custom for a woman to give her
Spouses testified to their devotion in this way. (The English expression
is: to take the dust of one's feet.)

[5] Title of the Islamic rulers.

[6] It would not be considered proper if a
Man would constantly go in and out of the women's room, except for them
certain hours dedicated to the meal or the rest.

[7] Bara = older; Tschota = younger. In posh homes
keep the widows, although they only receive a lifelong pension from
Have a right to share in the property of their spouse, but rank according to theirs
Age, and the titles Bara and Tschota remain with the older and
younger branches of the family, albeit the younger branch of the
ruling is.

[8] The raja's wife is held in high esteem
Importance to the distinguished Hindus.

[9] The national movement, which in the beginning was more
had economic rather than political character as they were mainly
aimed at encouraging local industry.

[10] "Heil dir, Mutter!", The opening words of a song by
Bankim Chatterjee, the famous Bengali novelist. The song
has now become the national anthem, and Gang Mataram has been since
Time of the Swadeshi movement for the national slogan.




SECOND CHAPTER


BIMALA'S STORY

IV

It was around this time that Sandip Babu and his followers came to ours
Area came to give speeches in the service of the Swadeshi movement.

There is to be a great meeting in our temple hall. We
Women sit there on one side, behind a curtain. The
Cries of triumph gang Mataram approaches, and a chill runs through
all of my veins. Suddenly a crowd of barefoot youths poured in
in the yellow ascetic robe and turban in the temple courtyard, like a
Mud-reddened brook with the first rain poured into the dried up
River bed pours. The whole room is filled with a tremendous one
Crowd through which Sandip Babu is carried, enthroned on a large chair,
that ten to twelve youths carry on their shoulders.

Gang Mataram! Gang Mataram! Gang Mataram! It's like heaven
wanted to burst and tear into a thousand pieces.

I had seen Sandip Babu's picture before. It was something in
his face, which I didn't like. Not that he was ugly - im
On the contrary, he had a strikingly beautiful face. Yes I know
not, it seemed to me that in spite of all the beauty there was too much mean stuff
was worked into it. The light in his eyes didn't quite seem to me
to be real. That is why I did not like my husband to be harmless to everyone
gave in to his demands. I could already lose the money
endure, but it annoyed me that he betrayed my husband and
exploited his friendship. His behavior wasn't that
Ascetics, not even that of a man in limited circumstances,
but rather stupid and betrayed a love of luxury ... A whole
A number of such considerations come back to my mind today, but
enough of it!

However, when Sandip Babu started speaking that afternoon and the
Hearts of the crowd billowed and swelled at his words as if they were all
Wanted to break through barriers, I saw him wonderfully transfigured.
Especially when his features suddenly appear from a ray of setting
Sun lit up slowly falling under the line of the temple roof
sank, then he appeared to me like a god sent.

From start to finish, his speech was a stormy outburst. Be
Confidence in the victory of the cause was rock-solid. I dont know how it
came, but suddenly I realized that I was impatiently closing the curtain
had thrown back and kept her eyes fixed on him. But
no one among the crowd noticed what I was doing. Only once did I notice
how his eyes glared at me, like the stars of the fateful
Orions.

I had completely forgotten myself. I was no longer the wife of
Raja, but the only representative of Bengal's women. And he
was the champion for Bengal. Like heaven its light over him
had poured out, the blessing of a woman must also be for his own
Dedicate task ...

It seemed very clear to me that since he had seen me, the fire
his speech had flared up even more passionately. Indra's steed left
not tame themselves, and now came the roll of thunder and the glow
of lightning. I told myself that his speech ignites my eyes
would have; because we women not only watch over the fire of the domestic
Hearth, but over the flame of the soul itself.

When I returned that evening, I was beaming with a new feeling
of pride and joy. The storm in me had my whole being
upset and shifted its focus. Like the virgins of
ancient Greeks I would like to have my long, shiny braids
cut off to make a bowstring for my hero.
When my external jewelry was related to my feelings
had, the collar and bracelets would have blown their locks and
poured over the gathering like a shower of meteors.
I felt that I had to make a personal sacrifice to avoid the storm
to be able to endure the passionate excitement in me.

When my husband came home later, I was trembling with fear that he might
say something in with the victory song that still sounded in my ears
Would be disharmony; I was afraid that his fanaticism for the truth might affect him
tempted to think about anything that was said in the afternoon
to express disapprovingly. Because then I would openly defy him and him
have humiliated. But he didn't say a word ... and so was me
not right. He should have said, "Sandip has got me going
brought. Now I see how much I was wrong all this time
have."

I had the feeling that out of anger and malice he was silent, that he himself
obstinately closed to enthusiasm. I asked him how long Sandip had
Babu would stay with us.

"He'll leave for Rangpur tomorrow morning," said my husband.

"Does it have to be tomorrow?"

"Yes, he promised to talk there."

I was silent for a while, then I asked again: “Couldn't he
make it possible to stay another day? "

“He will hardly be able to do that. But why do you want it? "

"I want to take him out to lunch and serve him myself."

My husband was surprised. He often asked me to be there
when he had close friends over for lunch, but I had myself
never be persuaded to do so. He saw me for a moment in silence and
attentively, with a look I didn't quite understand.

I suddenly felt a sense of shame.

"No, no," I cried, "there is no way of doing that."

"Why not?" He said. “I want to ask him myself; if there is any
is possible, he will certainly stay tomorrow. "

It turned out to be entirely possible.

I want to be very sincere. In that day I made my Creator
Allegations that he did not adorn me with outstanding beauty
had - not that I wanted to steal hearts with it, but because
Transfigured beauty. On this great day, men should
Recognize the deity of the land in women. But oh, the men's eyes
do not recognize the deity when it lacks outward beauty.
Would Sandip Babu see the Shakti [11] of our country revealed in me?
Or would he just think of me as an ordinary housewife?

That morning I sprinkled my drooping hair with it
fragrant water and tied it in a loose knot with one
red silk ribbon that I skilfully looped through. The lunch
should already be at twelve, so understandably I didn't have that
Time to lichen it in the usual way after my bath
to put up. I put on a gold-lined white sari, and mine too
short-sleeved muslin jacket had a gold hem.

I was of the opinion that my clothes were actually quite discreet and
that nothing could easily have been simpler. But my
Sister-in-law, who happened to be passing by, suddenly stopped in front of me, saw
head to toe at me and smiled with compressed lips
meaningful smile. When I asked her why, she said:
"I admire your finery."

"What's so amusing about it?" I asked, very annoyed.

"It's gorgeous," she said. “I was just thinking that one of those
low-cut English waists would make him perfect. "
Not just her mouth and eyes, but her whole body shone off
shrugging with suppressed laughter as she left the room.

I was very, very angry and wanted to take everything off at first
and put on my everyday clothes. I can't tell exactly what I mean
prevented from following this impulse. The women are the adornment of the
Society - I told myself - and my husband wouldn't
if I don't appear appropriately dressed in front of Sandip Babu.

My intention was not to appear until after you've been to the
Had lunch.

I would be the first to shy away from supervising the operation
best can overcome. But the meal wasn't on time
finished and it was getting late. Meanwhile my husband had me called to help me
to introduce the guest.

I was terribly embarrassed to see Sandip Babu in the face
should. However, I managed to get hold of myself and said, “I am
very sorry that dinner is going to be so late. "

He came up to me without any embarrassment and took me by my side
Place. "I get lunch," he said, "somehow every day,
but the goddess of abundance remains behind the scene. Now that the
Goddess herself has appeared, it matters little if the food is upon yourself
lets wait. "

He was just as emphatic in private intercourse as in his public ones
Talk. He didn't hesitate and seemed used to doing the unsolicited
To take the place he chose. He rose with such confidence
the right to confidentiality, that one would have felt wrong,
if you had wanted to dispute them.

It was a terrible thought to me that Sandip Babu would call me for a
shy, old-fashioned heap could hold insignificance. But
I would not have him for my life with witty replies
charm or dazzle. How was I just on the unfortunate
I wondered angrily, such a ridiculous figure
to play in front of him?

When lunch was over, I wanted to retire, but
Sandip Babu, bold as ever, stood in my way.

"You don't have to think I'm so material," he said. "Not that
Lunch made me stay, but your invitation. If you
now fled so you wouldn't be an honest one with your guest
Play. "

If he hadn't said these words in a cheerful and easy tone,
so they would have annoyed me. But I had to tell myself that he was standing
so close to my husband that I could consider myself his sister.

As I tried to settle on that intimate tone internally
my husband came to my aid by saying, “You could
because not coming back after you've had your lunch? "

"But you have to give us your word before we let you go," said
Sandip Babu.

"I promise," I said with a slight smile.

"Let me tell you why I can't trust you," Sandip went on
Babu gone. “Nikhil's been married nine years now, and this one
all along you avoided me. If you do this again for nine years
long, we won't see each other again at all. "

I listened to the spirit of his remark and asked softly, “But
why shouldn't we see each other again even then? "

“My horoscope tells me I'll die early. None of mine
Ancestor survived its thirtieth year. I am now
twenty-seven."

He knew this would make an impression. And this time he had to
heard a slight tone of concern in my voice as I whispered
said: “The blessing of the whole country will surely affect the evil influence of the
Turn away the stars. "

“Then the deity of the land itself must give its voice to this blessing
lend. This is why I so eagerly wish you would like
come back so that my talisman can start working today. "

Sandip Babu had such a way of taking everything by storm that I even did
did not get around to resent something that I never allow another to do
would have.

“Well,” he concluded with a laugh, “I shall hold your husband hostage for so long
keep here until you come back. "

When I was about to leave, he called, "May I ask you for one?"
Make a little effort? "

I turned around, a little startled.

"Don't be frightened," he said. “It's just a glass of water. you
may have noticed that I did not drink water while eating. I
drink it a little later. "

I had to show some interest in this and ask why. He
told me that he had been on for more than half a year
Suffered indigestion and now finally after seeing it all
Tried possible allopathic and homeopathic remedies in vain
had achieved wonderful results with local remedies
would have.

“You see,” he added with a smile, “God has mine himself
Affliction set up so that they can only face the bombardment
Swadeshi pills give way. "

This is where my husband interfered. “You must admit,” he said, “that you
have as great an attraction for foreign medicine as
the earth for meteors. You have three cupboards in your living room ... "

Sandip Babu interrupted him. 'Do you know what they are? They are the
Criminal police. They are there, not because they are needed, but because they are
are imposed on us by the modern social order that they
impose fines on us or cause other harm. "

My husband hated exaggeration, and I saw that he was
was out of tune. But any ornament is an exaggeration. She comes from
not from God, but from man. I remember how I used to bedefended against 
my husband when I told an untruth
had: »Only the trees and animals and birds tell the truth completely naked,
because these poor things lack ingenuity. In this they show
Humans their superiority over the lower creatures, and women
are still over the men. How rich jewelry suits women well,
so also embellishment of the truth. "

When I stepped out into the corridor that led to the women's quarters
I saw my sister-in-law standing at a window through which one could enter
Reception room could see. She tried to close the blinds
peek.

"You here?" I asked, surprised.

"At the listening post," she replied.


V.

When I came back, Sandip Babu apologized. “I'm afraid I do
ruined your appetite, ”he said worriedly.

I was very ashamed. I was really not that fast with mine
Ready to eat. It was easy to calculate that I was in the
Time hadn't been able to eat much. But it wasn't me
come that someone would do the math.

I had a feeling that Sandip Babu saw my ashamed what she did
of course still increased. "I knew," he said, "that the impulse of the
shy away from wild things that drove you from me, the more I appreciate it,
that you keep your promise. "

I couldn't think of a suitable answer, so I sat down
blushing and uncomfortable on one end of the sofa. The vision that
I had of myself as the deity embodied in women,
who by her mere presence crowned Sandip Babu, in proud majesty,
this vision had completely vanished from me.

Sandip Babu intentionally started a discussion with my husband. He
knew his keen mind in quick-witted replies on
came into its own. I have often observed since then that he never did
missed an opportunity for a verbal argument when I happened to be there
was.

He knew my husband's views on the gang Mataram cult and began
in a challenging tone: “Well, you're not admitting that you're at the
Patriotic advertising should also try to appeal to the imagination
Act?"

"You can work on her, Sandip, but I don't believe in it,
if you want to do everything with it. I want to see my country like this
as it is in truth, and that's why I would shy away from it for
consider it unworthy to work with mesmerizing patriotic speeches. "

“But what you call hypnotizing speeches is truth to me. I
believe in my country as in my God. Humanity is mine
holy. God reveals himself both in man and in his
Fatherland. "

“If you really believe that, then it shouldn't be for you
Giving difference between different people and the
different countries."

"Exactly. But my feeling is limited and cannot be the whole
Embrace humanity, therefore I adore them here among my people. "

“I have nothing against this veneration as such, but how do you want it
Worship God when you hate other peoples in which he is
also revealed? "

“Hate is also a servant of worship. Arjuna won Mahadevas
Grace [12] in wrestling with him. God will be with us in the end
when we are ready to face him in a quarrel. "

“If so, both are his servants, those of your people
serve, and those who harm him. But then what about patriotism?
preaching?"

“If it's your own people, it's different. There
the heart speaks clearly and demands that we serve it. "

"If you accept the consequence of this line of argument, you must say
that, since God reveals himself in us, we above all ourselves
have to serve because our natural instinct demands it. "

“Now listen, Nikhil, this is all just dry logic. Do you understand
because not that there is such a thing as feeling? "

“I will tell you frankly, Sandip,” replied my husband, “just mine
Feeling is hurt when you make injustice a duty
seeks, and godlessness to the moral ideal. If I can't
am to steal, the cause is not my logical one
Skills, but in a certain sense of self-respect and
Loyalty to my ideals. "

I was boiling inside. At last I could not be silent any longer. “Is
not the history of every country, "I cried," be it England,
France, Germany or Russia, the story of theft,
committed for the fatherland? "

“You have to pay for these thefts; you have to do it now
numbers; their story is not over yet. "

“In any case,” said Sandip Babu, “I think we should
do as they do. Just leave us the suitcases of our country for the time being
fill it with stolen treasures, and then like it, as with the others
Countries go centuries before we pay for it when it
comes to that at all. Because I ask you where do you go for this
›Numbers‹ an example in history? «

“When Rome paid for its sin, no one knew. The whole time seemed
his happiness to be unlimited. But don't you see one thing: how
them under the weight of their political lies and betrayals
to collapse?"

I had never had an opportunity before, in a discussion between
to be with my husband and friends. Whenever he's with
quarreled, I could feel how reluctantly he would corner me.
It was because he loved me so much. Today I saw his for the first time
The art of fencing in arguing.

Still, my heart did not want to side with him. I looked for
one answer, but I didn't find any. When someone is on the point of view
of justice, it sounds ugly to be told that
not everything that is good is suitable for life.

Suddenly Sandip Babu turned to me with the question: “What do you say?
You in addition? "

"I'm not for subtle distinctions," I burst out. "I will
Tell you very briefly and simply how I feel. I am only one
Human being and as such have my desires. I want mine
Do good to the fatherlands. In a pinch, I would take it by force
or steal. I have my bile. I could care for my country
sake get angry. I could, if it came down to it, murder and
Committing manslaughter to avenge his shame. I feel the need
to inspire me and what should inspire me like mine
Fatherland must confront me in obvious form. It has to be
have visible symbol that works its magic on me. I would like
my fatherland can personalize it and mother, goddess, Durga [13]
- and in his service I would call the earth with the blood of mine
Redden offerings. I am a person, not a 'saint'. "

Sandip Babu jumped up enthusiastically and shouted: "Hurray!" - In the next
For a moment he corrected himself and called: "Gang Mataram."

A faint puff of pain crossed my husband's face. His
His voice sounded very gentle when he said to me, “I'm not one either
Holy one, I am human too. And so I must never tolerate
that the evil that is in me becomes an idol of the fatherland
is spruced up - never! "

But Sandip Babu cried: “See, Nikhil, how the truth is in the heart of the
Accepts woman's flesh and blood. Woman knows how to be cruel;
its raging is like a blind storm. It's beautiful in his
Fearfulness. It is ugly with the man because it is the gnawing worm
of thought and reason. I tell you Nikhil
it is our women who will save the fatherland. Now is not
the time for anxious scruples. We have to, without wavering and without
to consider being brutal. We have to sin. We have to our women
give red sandel paste to anoint our sins and be put on the throne
put. Do you still remember the words of the poet:

    Come sin, beautiful sin,
    And pour with your burning hot kisses
    Fiery red wine in our blood!
    Let the trumpet sound imperiously
    And crown our foreheads with the wreath
    Exultant self-indulgence!
    O goddess, great molester, come, anoint
    The breast us shamelessly with the black mud of shame!

Away with that righteousness that does not smile to ruin the enemy
can fling! "

A chill ran through me as Sandip Babu raised so proudly
Head, following the impulse of the moment, mocked everything that the
Honored people in all countries and at all times as their highest
to have.

But stomping on in wild defiance, he went on: "I know you,
beautiful fire spirit who burns the home to ashes to be with his
Flame to light up the whole world. Give us the indomitable courage
to plunge into the deepest hell of perdition! Give everything
fatal is the charm of your beauty! "

It was not clear who Sandip Babu was calling with these last words.
Perhaps it was the deity to whom his bond, Mataram, was meant. Maybe
it was the women of his fatherland in general. Maybe also
it was their representative, the woman who stood before him. He would still have in
continued in the same tone, unless my husband suddenly rose
and would have said lightly, touching his shoulder: “Sandip, Tschandranath
Babu is here. "

I started and when I looked around I saw an old one
Gentleman of venerable appearance, who stood quietly waiting at the door, in
Doubt whether he should come in or withdraw. On his
The face was a mild light like that of the setting sun.

My husband came up to me and whispered, “This is my teacher, from
I've told you so many times Greet him as it is due! "

I bowed low and touched his feet in awe. He blessed
me and said: "May God always protect you, mother!"

Oh, I was so in need of such a blessing at that moment.


Footnotes:

[11] Power, might, especially the magical power of one
God; then personified as a female deity. Specifically as a name
Shiva's wife, who is also called Kali. (Transl.)

[12] Arjuna, the main hero of the Pandu tribe in the great
Heroic epic Mahābhārata. Mahādēva, "the great god", nickname Vishnus,
who appears in human form in this epic, as Krishna
Cousin Arjunas, whom he serves as a charioteer. (Transl.)

[13] Another name of Shiva's wife, who is usually Uma, Kali
etc. is called. (Transl.)


NIKHIL'S STORY

I.

Once I was so confident in my belief that I thought I was
Would be able to carry anything my God ordered me to do. I would never
put to the test. Now I think the hour has come.

I used to test my fortitude by looking at myself all possible
Imagined evils that might happen to me - poverty, dungeon, shame,
Death - even the death of Bimala. And when I said to myself that I was the
Would have strength to endure it all with steadfastness, so said
I'm sure not too much. Only one thing had never crossed my mind
and that's what I'm thinking about today and what I don't know if I am
can really take it. It is as if there is a thorn in me somewhere
Heart sits and stings me constantly while I do my daily
Work am. He seems to keep stabbing himself when I sleep. As soon as
When I wake up in the morning, I feel that the face of the sky is shining
has lost. What is it? What happened?

My feelings have become so sensitive that even my past
Life that bore the glow of happiness, now my heart with its lie
tortures, and show the worry and shame that creep up on me
the more they try to cover their face, the more and more undisguised
hide. My heart has become all eyes. Just the things that
should remain hidden that I do not want to see, crowd me
on.

Now the day has finally come when my unhappy lot turns into
to reveal a long series of strokes of fate. All
Unexpectedly bitter need has come to the heart where there is abundance
seemed to rule. The wages I received for nine years of my youth
Paid deception, I must now repay the truth with interest,
and I'll have to pay for it all my life.

What is the use of forcibly trying to maintain my pride?
Why shouldn't I admit that I have defects? Maybe I miss
the ill-considered bravado that women love about men.
But is strength just the development of muscle power? Strength is safe
kick the weak in the dust?

But what use are all these considerations? You can't get worthiness through it
acquire that one disputes about it. And I'm unworthy, unworthy
unworthy!

But even if I am unworthy - the real value of the does not exist
Love in the fact that they repeatedly out of the fullness of theirs to the unworthy
donates own surplus? There are many types of for the worthy
Rewards on God's earth, but God especially has love
Reserved for the unworthy.

Until now, Bimala, my domestic Bimala, was the product of the spatial
Tightness and the habitual little duties. I wondered if
the love she gave me, welling from the bottom of her heart or the
habitual exercise of an acquired duty.

I longed to see Bimala in all of her truth and power
to see it bloom. But I didn’t consider that one had any claims
must give up that are based on conventional rights when a human
should develop freely in its true essence.

Why didn't I think of that? It happened from feeling prouder
Security in my wife's possession? No. It happened because I did that
put full trust in love. I was vain enough, too
believe that I have the strength within me to see the truth in
to endure its terrifying nakedness. I knew I was the
Providence tried, but I persisted in my proud resolve to do the
To pass the test victoriously.

There was one point that Bimala did not understand. she could not
really understand that in my eyes any use of force
Weakness is. Only the weak do not dare to be fair. you
evade the responsibility and try on unauthorized
To get to the goal quickly. It makes Bimala impatient, though
to show patience. She loves the impetuous, violent, and unjust in men.
There must be some fear mixed in with their awe.

I was hoping that Bimala when she was out in full freedom
the world lived would soon be rid of this weakness. But now
I am sure that this is deeply rooted in their nature. She loves that
Noisy. If you really enjoy the simple fare in life
it must be spicy enough to make your tongue and palate burn.
But my principle has always been never to do my duty with a wild impetus
do nor incite me to it with the fiery wine of excitement.
I know it's going to be hard for Bimala to take note of that quality in me
she considers my scruples to be weakness, and she is mad at me for being me
do not rush off in blind zeal shouting: Gang Mataram.

And as for that point, I have it with all of my own
Compatriots spoiled because I don't join in their noise. you are
sure that either I have a desire for some title or I have myself
fear the police. The police, on the other hand, think that I have too much
Show meekness so as not to plan some secret attack.

But my feeling tells me that those who do not care for their fatherland
can inspire when they see it as it really is, or
who cannot love the people, just in their humanity,
who must shout and make their country an idol in order to
to keep up their enthusiasm - that this the intoxication
love themselves more than their homeland.

When we try to raise the subject of our enthusiasm above
as the truth, we thereby show that we are by nature unfree.
Our sick life force must either be stimulated by some madness
brought or by some worldly or spiritual authority
driven to get moving. As long as we are the
Closing up the truth and taking action only through hypnotic influence
can be pushed as long as we have to tell ourselves that we have not yet
are able to rule ourselves.

When Sandip recently accused me of lacking imagination and that
I could therefore not see my fatherland as a living ideal figure,
Bimala agreed. I didn't say anything in my defense because what
Fortunately, does it help if you win a dispute? Your deviating
Opinion was not based on a lack of insight, it was based on theirs
Reason in the otherness of their nature.

You reproach me for lack of imagination, - that means with them,
that I have oil in my lamp, but no flame. But this is
just the reproach that I hold them. I want to tell them: you
be dark as the flints. You have to face violent clashes
come and make noise to make sparks. But this
isolated flashes only serve your vanity, but do not help you
to see clearly.

I noticed for some time that Sandip had cravings
is controlled. His sensuality tarnishes his religious feeling and
makes him tyrannical in his patriotism. His mind is sharp
but his nature is raw, and so he glorifies his selfish
Desires under high-sounding names. The cheap consolation of hatred is to him
as much need as the satisfaction of his desires. Bimala has
I often warned me about his greed for money in the past. I gave her inside
right, but I couldn't bring myself to haggle with Sandip.
I was even ashamed to admit to myself that he was me
exploited.

But today it will be difficult to make Bimala understand that
Sandip's love of the country is just another form of his covetous
Self-love is. Bimala's hero worship for Sandip keeps me all the more
from talking to her about him because I'm afraid that a
a slight emotion of jealousy unconsciously tempt me to exaggerate
could. It may be that the pain in my heart is Sandip's image
already distorted. And yet it might be better to speak out
Than letting my feelings continue to gnaw inside me.


II

I have known my teacher for thirty years now. Neither slander nor slander
Misfortune and death itself have some kind of horror for him.
Nothing could have saved me from following the traditions of this
our family was born into it when he was not the focus
my life would have made its own, with its peace and his
Truth and with its ideals. For me the good itself was in him
Become shape.

My teacher came to me that day and said, "Is it necessary that you
Hold Sandip back here any longer? "

He was naturally so sensitive to all signs of the
It was bad that he had immediately felt the danger. He doesn't show easily
his inner movement, but that day I saw the dark ones
Shadows of coming calamity terrified him. I know how much he is
love me

Over tea I said to Sandip, “I've just got a letter from Rangpur.
They complain that I'm selfishly holding you here. When
do you want to travel there? "

Bimala was pouring the tea. An expression of disappointment
went over her face. She quickly gave Sandip a questioning look.

"I was just thinking," said Sandip, "that this back and forth
Wandering around means a tremendous waste of strength for me. I
believe that I can have a much stronger and more lasting effect when I'm from
work out a central point. "

He looked at Bimala and said: "Don't you think so too?"

Bimala hesitated a moment, then said, “Both seem to me
good - both to work from a central point and to travel around.
The kind that gives you the most satisfaction is for you
right one."

"Then I will be very frank," said Sandip. “I have nowhere
found that alone would have been able to hold my enthusiasm
to keep awake. That's why I kept traveling and that
People kindled to regain strength for me from their enthusiasm
scoop. Today you gave me the mission to my people. Such
I have never found fire in a person. From you I will
Lend a flame with which I will light the fire all around the land.
No, don't turn away ashamed! Shyness and
Modesty is no longer befitting you. You are the queen
our beehive and we, the worker bees, will look after you
crowd. You will be our focus and us to our work
cheer. "

Bimala blushed all over with embarrassed pride, and so did her hand
trembled as she continued pouring the tea.

One day my teacher came to me and said, “Why are you two traveling
not even after Dardschiling for a change? You don't see well
out. Are you getting enough sleep? "

In the evening I asked Bimala if she would like a little trip to the
To make mountains. I knew that she longed for the Himalayas
to see. But she did not want ... The cause of the fatherland hindered
you probably!

I mustn't lose my trust, I'll wait. The
Passage from the narrow to the wide world is stormy. If you are at
accustomed to freedom, I'll know where my place is. If I
realize that I am in the bodies of the world out there not
fit in, I will not quarrel with my fate, but
walk in silence ... use force? What for? Can violence do something against them
Truth?


SANDIPS TALE

I.

The incompetent says: What is assigned to me is mine. And the weak one
agrees with him. But the whole world teaches us: This is only really mine
what I can conquer. My country is not yet mine
that I was born in it. It won't be mine until the day I
am able to submit it to me.

Everyone has a natural right to property, and therefore greed is
something natural.

Nature in its wisdom does not want us to give up quietly. After what
my sense demands that my surroundings must create for me. This is here
on earth the only true relationship between our inner and outer ones
World. Leave moral ideals to the poor, pale addicts
Creatures too weak to covet and too weak to
to access. Those who desire with all their soul and with all their heart
enjoy for whom there are no qualms and scruples, they are
Providence's elect and anointed. For them nature spreads hers
richest and most beautiful treasures. They swim through streams
jump over walls, break in doors to get what
seems to them to be worth the effort. This is the way to get things
Enjoyment; for every thing only receives its value by being around it
fights.

Nature is quite ready to surrender, but only to the robber. Because
she takes pleasure in this impetuous desire, this violent one
Kidnapping. And so she does not put her wreath around the thin, arid
Throat of the ascetic. The music of the wedding march sounds. I am allowed to
Don't let the wedding hour go by. My heart is full of desire.
Because - who is the bridegroom? It's me. The bride belongs to him who is with
the torch in hand comes at the right hour. The groom in
Nature's wedding hall comes unexpectedly and uninvited.

Should i be ashamed? No, I don't know any shame! I demand everything
what I would like to have, and often I do not hesitate to ask,
before i take it. Those who do without because they don't dare
to access, seek this surrender by clad with a dignity
they call him humility.

The world in which we are born is a world of reality. If
a person from the real things market with empty hands and empty
Stomach goes away and only fills his sack with grandiose words, why
did he even get into this rough world? Were these people
hired by the Epicureans of the afterlife to work in their pleasure garden where
ethereal flowers and fruits bloom and ripen according to old, lovely ones
Melodies to sing their pious songs? I agree in these tunes
not one, and those essential fruits are not nutritious enough for me.

What I desire, I desire wholeheartedly and unconditionally. I want it
crush and knead with hands and feet; I want to get off my head
Anoint it up to the toe, I want to devour it and myself whole
fill with it. The squeaking whistles of those who pass through her
have worn moral fasting until they have grown thin and pale
are like starved vermin in a bed that has been abandoned for a long time
never reach my ear.

I don't want to pretend, because that would be cowardice. But if I
could not make up my mind to pretend where pretension is necessary
is that would be cowardly too. You build your walls out of greed; out
I break through greed. You use your power; I use
my skill. These are the realities of life. On
kingdoms and empires and all the great enterprises rest on them
the human.

But those Avatáras [14] who descend from their paradise to be in
to speak a sacred gibberish to us - they preach to us empty
Words. Hence, all her wisdom must show itself, in spite of the applause she received
find, but finally take refuge in the hiding places of the weaklings.
The strong, the rulers of the world, despise them. Those who the
Had the courage to see this, succeeded while those poor
Give weight to one side of their nature and to the Avatáras
the other being dragged; they put one foot in the boat of the
Reality and the other in the boat of the inanimate and are up
this way in a miserable position since they are neither fixed nor
can move forward.

There are many people who just seem born to deal with
To plague thoughts of death. Maybe this one has hanging over life
Death some of the beauty of the sunset that enchants them.
Nikhil lives such a life, if you can even call it life.
Years ago I had a long argument about this point
him.

“It is true,” he said, “that something can only be obtained by force.
But what does violence mean? And what does attain mean? The power to which
I believe is the power of renunciation. "

“So you are attracted to the fame of total bankruptcy, the fame, all of yours
Got to get married? ”I exclaimed.

"Exactly as it stimulates the little cake to get rid of its shell",
he replied. “The shell is certainly something real, and yet it becomes
abandoned for light and air, neither of which are tangible. You
would you call that a poor exchange? "

If Nikhil ever begins to speak in parables, it will be
hopeless to make it clear to him that he is only operating with words, not
with realities. Well, for all I care he may be happy with his
Parables. We are the carnivores in this world; we have
Teeth and claws, we chase and grab and tear. We give
not satisfied with the grass we ate in the morning
to chew again in the evening. Anyway, we can shut the door
not barricade our livelihood from you parable brokers
to let. In such a case we just have to rob and steal; because
we just have to live.

People will say that I am making a new principle of life because
in this world people speak differently, although in reality they are
always acts accordingly. Therefore, like me, they cannot see that this is the case
is the only prevailing principle of morality. I know as a fact
that my view is by no means an abstract theory, because it has
has proven itself in practical life. I've found my style
always conquered the hearts of women who have their feet on the ground
Reality and not like the men in with a haze of ideas
filled balloons roam in dreamland.

The women feel in my features, my being, my posture, mine
Talk about a despotic passion - not a passion that comes from the
Fever of asceticism has withered, not a passion common to everyone
Step backwards into doubts and concerns, but one
full-blooded passion. It comes foaming and roaring like the tide
hence and roar out their desires. Women feel inside
Hearts that this indomitable passion is the lifeblood of the world;
she knows no law but herself and therefore she is victorious. Therefore
have they so often willingly withdrew from the tidal wave of my passion
Let yourself get carried away without asking whether life or death is the end.

Those who direct their longing to the hereafter give it
Desirability just another direction. It remains to be seen how high
the rushing stream of her fountain will rise, and how
play its waters for a long time. One thing is certain: women are not for
created these pale creatures - for these idealistic ones
Lotus eater.

"Elective affinity!" If it suited my purpose, I often did
said that God created certain couples for one another and that
their association is the only legitimate association higher than
all associations by law. For although man is his
Wants to follow nature, he is not satisfied if he is not behind
can hide any phrase - and this is why the
World is so inundated with lies.

"Elective affinity!" Why should there be only one? You can take it with you
Have thousands. I have never committed myself to nature, all
to overlook my countless elective affinities around a single one
sake. I've already discovered many in my life so far, but
therefore the door of the next one is not locked - and this next one
I see clearly in front of my eyes. And they too have their elective affinities
discovered with me.

And now?

If I don't win her now, I'll be called a coward.


Footnotes:

[14] Embodiment of divine beings as humans or animals
to be born on earth.




THIRD CHAPTER


BIMALA'S STORY

VI

Where was my shame gone? I didn't have time to worry about myself
ponder. My days and nights passed in a vortex, in
a vortex of which I was the center. Deliberation and delicacy
couldn't get close to me.

One day my sister-in-law did this to my husband
Comment: "Until now it has always been the women of this house who
had to cry. Now it's the men’s turn. "

"We have to be careful that they get it right," she went on,
turned to me, away. “I see you are ready to fight, Tschota
Rani [15]. Just throw your arrows right into their hearts! "

She looked me up and down with a keen eye. None of that
The shine of color that my clothes, my jewelry, my speech, my whole
Emanating beings escaped her. Today I am ashamed of it
speak, but then I felt no shame. There was something inside of me
Work of which I myself was not aware. I groomed myself excessively
to clean, but almost mechanically, with no particular intention. I knew well
how I would like Sandip Babu best, but that took me
no special inspiration, because he spoke quite openly in front of everyone
about that.

One day he said to my husband: “Do you remember, Nikhil, when I did
our queen bee first saw that she sat there so respectably in hers
gold-lined sari. Her eyes looked questioningly into space, as if lost
Stars as if they had stood on the edge of darkness for millennia
and looked like something unknown. But when I saw her
I felt a shiver run through me. It was as if the
the golden hem of her sari was her own inner fire that came out of her
erupted and flicked her. This is the flame we need
the visible fire! Listen to me, queen bee, you should have us
really do prove to be a living flame once again
dress."

Until then I was like a little brook on the edge of a village
been. The tone and rhythm were different from now. But then the tide came
up from the sea; my chest swayed, my banks gave way, and they are loud
The drumbeats of the ocean waves whipped my run to great lawn.
I didn't know what the voice in my blood was trying to say. Where was mine
remained a former self? Where did all this shine pour on me from?
Sandip's hungry eyes burned like consecrated lamps in front of my shrine.
Each of his looks announced that I was a wonder in beauty and
Makes; and the loud sound of his praise, whether he said it or
not, drowned out all the other voices in my world. The Creator had
created me all over again? so I asked myself in amazement. Did he want me
compensate me for neglecting me for so long? I the
I had been quite inconspicuous and insignificant before, suddenly
became beautiful and felt like the crown of Bengal.

Because Sandip Babu wasn't just anyone. Millions of spirits flowed in him
of the country together. If he called me the queen of the beehive
so the whole choir of enthusiastic patriots cheered me. So it was,
that the loud mockery of my sister-in-law no longer touch me
could. My relationships with the whole world were transformed. Sandip
Babu made it clear to me how the whole country needed me. I was
It wasn't difficult to believe that at the time, because I felt it inside of me
Strength to do anything. I was filled with divine power. It was something
what I had never felt before, what was higher than myself. Me
didn't have time to research what kind it was. It seemed to me too
belong and yet go beyond me. It covered all of Bengal.

Sandip Babu cared for me in all the important and unimportant things that
approached the national cause to seek advice. At first I was very
embarrassed and hesitated to answer, but that soon disappeared. What I
also suggested, my advice always seemed to astonish him. Then
he got enthusiastic and said: We men can only think. your
Women have a way of understanding without thinking. The woman is God
Imagination sprung from; he hammered the man out of the fabric.

Sandip Babu received letters from all over the country and sent them to me
showed to hear my opinion. Occasionally he disagreed
if I. But I didn't try to convince him. Then he let me
probably call after a few days - as if suddenly a new one
Knowledge would have come up - and said: “I was wrong;
You were quite right in your point of view. 'He often confessed to me that he
Whenever he acted against my advice, he turned things wrong
would have. So I gradually came to believe that behind everything
it happened that Sandip Babu stood and that Sandip Babu himself of the simple
A woman's mind. The pride of a big one
Responsibility filled my whole being.

My husband had no place on our council. Sandip Babu treated him
like a younger brother whom one is probably very fond of personally
But advice in shops is not needed. He used to
to speak of my husband's childlike naivete with an indulgent smile,
by saying that his strange theories and perverted ideas
had a touch of humor that made them all the more amiable.
It was apparently precisely this love for Nikhil that moved Sandip Babu,
not to burden him with worries about the fatherland.

Nature has many narcotics in her pharmacy, which she secretly
uses if she wants to cut off life relationships treacherously, so
that nobody notices the operation until you finally wake up and see
what a big cut is made. When the knife was busy
Cutting off the innermost bonds of my life was my spirit like that
clouded over by the deafening gas vapors that I am not in the slightest
realized what cruelty was being committed to me. That's probably how it is
Nature of woman. When her passion is awakened, she loses it
Feeling for everything else. We women are like the river: as long as we
staying within our shores, we give fertility with all that
we have; as soon as we flood them we bring destruction with everything
what we are.


Footnotes:

[15] As the wife of the younger brother, Bimala was the Tschota
Rani or younger mistress.


SANDIPS TALE

II

Something must be wrong. I noticed something the other day.

Since my arrival, Nikhil's room had become something of an in-between
half women's room, half men's room: Bimala had access from the
Women's chambers and I from the other side. If only we slower
would have gone to work and our advantage with a little more caution
had perceived, we would hardly have offended others.
But we let ourselves be so driven by our passion that we even
did not think of the consequences.

As soon as Bima walks into Nikhil's room, I sort of notice it in mine.
I hear ankle braces ringing or other small noises; the
Door may be closed a little more forcefully than necessary
is; the bookcase is a little swollen and creaks when you open it
opens violently. When I get in, I find Bima with her back to
Door and is completely absorbed in it, one of the books
to choose the braids. And how I can give her my help with this
offer a difficult task, she is shocked and refuses; and
then we come to other matters of our own accord.

The other day, on an ominous [16] Thursday afternoon, I came across the
Wave of these noises hastily from my room. In the corridor stood
a man guard. I went on without even looking at him; but when
When I approached the door, he walked my way and said, “Not there
in, sir! "

“Not in there! Why?"

"The mistress is inside."

"Well, tell the mistress that Sandip Babu wishes to see her."

“You can't do that, sir. That is against the order. "

I was very upset. "I order you," I said with
raised voice, "go and report me!"


The guy was a little baffled by my demeanor.

In the meantime I had approached the door. I almost had it
reached when he followed me and grabbed my arm saying:
"No, sir, you are not allowed in."

What! A servant dared to touch me! I went along with my arm
with a jolt and gave the man a resounding slap in the face. In the same
Instant Bima came out of the room and saw how the man was about to
to get naughty against me.

I will never forget the picture of her standing in her anger! That
Bima is beautiful is my own discovery. Most of the people here
wouldn't find anything special about her. These boobies would be their big,
call slender figure "thin". But just this flexibility
I admire it, it is like a life-giving fountain that comes from
rises to the depths of the maternal earth. Your skin color is dark
but of a luminous darkness like the sharp, flashing edge
of a sword.

"Nanku!" She commanded when she stood in the doorway, holding her arm imperiously
stretched out, "go away!"

"Don't be mad at him," I said. “If he's under orders, I am
it is me who must go. "

Bima's voice was still trembling when she replied, “You mustn't
go away. Come in!"

This was not a request, it was also an order! I followed her when she did
came in, sat down, took a fan that was on the table and
started to fan me. Bima scribbled something with a pencil
a sheet of paper, called a servant and gave it to him with the words:
"Bring this to the Maharajah!"

"Forgive me," I said. “I was so beside myself that I was yours
Servant struck. "

"He served him right," said Bima.

“But the poor fellow wasn't really to blame. He obeyed
only at his command. "

At that moment Nikhil came in. I got up hastily and kicked
to the window, with your back to the room.

"The doorkeeper Nanku insulted Sandip Babu," Bima said to Nikhil.

Nikhil seemed so genuinely surprised that I couldn't help myself
turn around and stare at him. Should he want to deny? Self a
an unusually good man cannot show his pride in truth in front of his wife
sustained when the woman feels like it.

“He had the cheek to stand in for Sandip Babu when he was here
wanted to come in, ”continued Bima. "He said he had orders ..."

"Orders from whom?" Asked Nikhil.

"How am I supposed to know?" Bima cried impatiently, while her anger
and shame the tears came to my eyes.

Nikhil called the man and questioned him. “It wasn't mine
Guilt, ”Nanku repeated defiantly. "I had orders."

"Who gave you the order?"

"The Bara Rani."

We were all silent for a while. After the man was out, Bima said:
"Nanku has to go." Nikhil didn't answer. I saw that his
A sense of justice resisted it. Always new difficulties
rose before him. But this time the solution was particularly difficult. Bima
wasn't the woman to let a thing go. She had to be hers
Claim to sister-in-law by punishing the boy.
And when Nikhil was silent, her eyes sparkled with lightning. She didn't know
how she expressed her contempt for her husband's weakness
Should express. After a while Nikhil left the room
without saying a word.

The next day, Nanku was out of sight. When I asked, I was told
that he was sent to one of the other goods and that it was not his pity
be.

I could take a quick look every now and then that showed me
what devastation the resulting storm behind the scene
served. I can only say that Nikhil is a strange creature
is very different from others.

The result was that from now on Bima would easily turn me into one
cozy conversation called into the living room without any
A pretext or an attempt to give the gathering the appearance of chance
give. So we gave up almost all restraint, and what so far
was tacitly understood, was now spoken openly. The
The wife of a rajah usually lives in a star region similar to the
is so far from ordinary mortals that there is no path leading to it.
What a triumph for the victorious progressive truth it was
that gradually, but inexorably, a veil of veiled custom
fell to the other until nature finally found itself in its true form
showed.

Triumph of Truth? Yes the truth! Mutual attraction
between man and woman is the basis of all being. The whole world
matter, from the speck of dust upwards, is subject to this law.
And yet people try to put them behind a veil of words
keep hidden, and do with homely ordinances and
It is forbidden to make a home appliance out of her.

If, in spite of all this, nature awakens at the call of the truth, what a
Grind your teeth and hit your chest! But you can with that
Arguing storm? He doesn't bother to answer, but rather
just shakes his opponent.

I enjoy the sight of this truth, which is more and more to me
revealed. How lovely are these trembling steps, this
Turn away; how lovely are these little deceptions with which Bima
not only deceive others but also yourself! Pretense is that
best weapon of the real against the unreal, for the enemies
of the real always seek to dishonor it by calling it raw,
and therefore it must hide or disguise itself. It must not be open
to confess: “Yes, I am raw because I am true. I am flesh and blood.
I am passion. I am hungry, the one without mercy and without shame
grab it. "

I see everything clearly in front of me now. The curtain flutters, and through that
I can only see the preparations for the catastrophe. The small
red ribbon that runs through the lush, full of secret desire
Meandering masses of hair is the licking lightning in the thundercloud. I
feel the glow of her passion with every movement of her robe,
more than she may even feel.

Bima is not aware of reality because she is ashamed of it.
Because people have a bad name for this reality
given, they call her Satan. And so it must be in the form of a
Snake sneaking into the garden of paradise and the elect
The man's mate whisper her secrets in her ear and use them to
Bring garbage. Then it is all over, until death is the end
is.

My poor little queen bee lives like a dream. She does not know,
which way she goes. It would not be advisable to do it ahead of time
to wake up. It is best that I pretend I don't either
Had a clue.

At lunch the other day, she stared at me strangely without looking
guess what such looks mean. When my eyes met hers
she turned away. "You are wondering about my appetite," I said.
“I can hide everything except that I like to eat. But why
do you want to blush for me if I'm not ashamed? "

She just blushed deeper and stuttered: "No, no, I just saw ..."

"I know," I interrupted. “Women have a thing for
Desirable men, because it is precisely through our desires that they rule
us. The indulgence they always showed me only has me
made more shameless. I don't mind if you watch everyone
the good things with me disappear. That's why I'm going to take every bite
enjoy."

The other day I read an English book that discussed sexual issues with a lot
treated with bold realism. I had it in the living room
to let. When I came in the afternoon of the following day to
to get something, Bima sat with the book in hand. Than they mean
Hearing footsteps, she tossed it down quickly and put another book on it
- a volume of poems by Felicia Hemans.

“I have never been able to understand,” I began, “why women are like that
are embarrassed if you surprise them reading poetry.
We men - lawyers, mechanics or whatever - would have one
Reason to be ashamed. If we want to read poetry, we should
read them in the dead of night, with the doors closed. But you women
are so related to poetry. The creator himself is a lyric one
Poet; Jajadeva [17] must practice his divine art at his feet
to have."

Bima didn't answer, just blushed, embarrassed. She pretended
she wanted to leave the room. But I held her back. "No,
no, please read on! I just want to take a book that I do
Left it here and get me out of here. ”I took it
my book off the table. “It's lucky I couldn't think of it, here
look, "I went on," otherwise you would have felt like seeing me
scold. "

"Really! Why? ”Asked Bima.

"Because it's not poetry," I said. "It only contains bare facts,
and depicts them without any make-up, without any adornment. I wanted to, Nikhil
read it once. "

"Why do you want that?" Asked Bima with a slight frown.

“Because he's a man, one of us. The only thing I have against him
is that he does not see this world as it is, but to himself
delighted with a dream of her. Didn't you notice this was him
tempted to do so, our national Swadeshi movement like a piece
To look at poetry exactly following a certain rhythm
must advance? But we come with our prose like clubs
in between and beat the whole rhythm to shame. "

"What does your book have to do with the Swadeshi movement?"

“You would know immediately after reading it. Nikhil wants
always proceed according to ready-made principles, like in the Swadeshi movement
in all other things; therefore he runs against them at every turn
human nature and then begins to revile it. He does not want to
Realize that human nature is older than all beautiful
Principles and they will all survive. "

Bima was silent for a moment, then she said seriously: “Isn't it in
human nature grounds that it tries to get beyond itself
come out? "

I had to smile inside. "These are not your words," I thought
with me. “You learned that from Nikhil. You yourself are healthy
Human child. Your blood heard the voice of nature. I know
for not that the fire of life burns in all your veins? How
for a long time they will still be able to treat you with the cold envelope of the
To cool down morals? "

"The weak are in the majority," I said aloud. “You're poisoning them
Ears of people by repeating such slogans over and over again.
Nature has denied them strength - now they are looking for it in this way
to weaken others. "

"We women are weak," replied Bimala. “So we have to go on
participate in the conspiracy of the weak. "

"You women weak!" I cried, laughing. “The men glorify yours
Tenderness and fragility, and that is why you consider yourself to be
weak. But you women are the strong ones. The men can
great being from their so-called freedom, but themselves
know, know how unfree they are. You have the holy ones yourself
Scriptures written to bind oneself through; from their idealism
they forged gold chains for the women with whom they they
captivate physically and mentally. If the men weren't so great
had the ability to catch themselves in their own nets, so would have
nothing can take away their freedom. But you women have body and
Soul opened to reality. You received it in and out of you
you born. You nourished them on your breasts. "

Bima is very well read for a woman and not easy to get
to acknowledge my arguments. “If that were so,” she protested, “so
women would soon have lost all charm for men. "

"Women see this danger," I replied. “You know they do
Men want to be deceived, and so they deceive them wherever they are
can, with their own idioms. You know the man in
his tendency towards vice loves intoxication more than healthy food, and
therefore they offer themselves to him as intoxicants. The woman needed herself
not to be pretended if she did not do it for the man's sake. "

"But why do you want to destroy the illusion?"

“For the sake of freedom. I want my country to be free. I
but would also like us humans to be free from one another. "


III

I know well that it is not advisable to suddenly find a sleepwalker
to wake up. But I am so impetuous by nature that a hesitant gait
is impossible for me. I knew then that I was daring a lot. I knew that
the first shock of such ideas puts people completely out of balance
can bring. But with women, the most daring is always the winner.

We were already in the best of stages - Nikhils had to be older
Teacher Tschandranath Babu trudging in! It could be done quite well
live in this world if these schoolmasters weren't they
annoy you and make you want to run away. The people of
Nikhils Art always want to make the world a school. And now came
this embodiment of a school comes in at the critical moment.

We all always keep something in some corner of our heart
from the schoolboy and I, myself, felt a little intimidated.
Poor Bima, however, went to her class place in the same manner and solemnly
be the first. She suddenly seemed to remember that they were being tested
should.

There are people who are like pointers: they are always ready for the
To bring our thoughts to another track.

No sooner was Tschandranath Babu there than he was looking for one
Excuses to go out again. "I beg your pardon," he muttered,
"but..."

But before he could finish, Bima walked quickly up to him, and himself
Bowing reverently to him, she said, “Oh, please, don't go
away! Don't you want to sit down? ”She looked like a drowning man,
looking for a hold - the little coward.

But maybe I was wrong. Probably was a little
female problem. She might want her worth in my eyes
increase. Or she just wanted to say to me: “Don't get any ideas for yourself
A moment that you have completely overcome me! My awe of
Tschandranath Babu is even bigger. "

Well, for all I care, adore him as much as you want! That's what they live on
Schoolmaster. But since I am not one, I can give such empty compliments
do without.

Chandranath Babu began to speak of the Swadeshi movement. I
thought I wanted him to continue his monologue. Its ever
the smartest thing to do is to let an old man talk until he is of
himself stops. He has the feeling that he is the world in order
brings, and has no idea how far the real world from him and his
Is chatter.

But even my worst enemy can't say that a
Excess of patience is my fault. And when Chandranath Babu said:
"If we expect to reap fruit where we have not sown, then ..."
I had to interrupt him. "Who wants fruit?" I cried.
»We follow the author of the Gita [18] who says that we only
to think of our actions, not of the fruits of our actions. "

"But what is it that you want?" Asked Chandranath Babu.

"Thorns!" I exclaimed. "They are available for free."

"But the thorns don't just bother the others," he replied. "Who
if she sows, she kicks herself in the feet. "

"Those are all pretty school rules," I replied. "We want
meanwhile quench our burning longing. Prick instantly
_us_ the thorns not yet; later, when we feel it, we can
yes still regret it. But why should the thought give us at all
scare? If we have to die in the end we have enough time
to cool off. As long as the flame is burning, let's boil and boil over! "

Tschandranath Babu smiled. “Cook as much as you want,” he said, “but
just don't think of this as work or heroism! The peoples who live in the
Have achieved something in the world through action, not through
Overcooking reached. But those who have always shied away from work
want when they suddenly become conscious of their miserable situation
come, achieve liberation in an unlawful and violent way. "

I was just girding my loins for a crushing lunge against him
to do when Nikhil came back. Chandranath Babu rose and
said to Bima: "Now I have to go, mother, I have to
work."

When he was gone I showed Nikhil the book I had in hand.
"I was just telling our queen bee about this book," I said.

Ninety-nine percent of all people want to be deceived by lies
but this eternal schoolmaster's pupil is easier to deal with
Truth fool yourself. Openness to him is the best deception.
So the easiest thing for me to play with was my cards
to lay openly on the table.

Nikhil read the title on the cover, but said nothing. "These
Writers, "I went on," sweep all the dust with their brooms
away from the idioms with which people have covered up our world.
So I just said, I want you to read it once. "

"I read it," said Nikhil.

"Well, what do you say?"

"It is quite good for those who try really hard to think,
but for the others it is poison. "

"What do you mean by that?"

“Anyone who preaches that everyone has equal rights to property must not
be a thief yourself. Because if he is, he is preaching lies. And who
if a passion nourishes itself, this book will not get it right
understand."

“Passion,” I exclaimed, “is our best guide right now. If
if we distrust him, we might as well tear our eyes out to
better to see. "

Nikhil was visibly aroused. “Passion,” he said, “only has
their right as long as we restrain them. When we do what we see right
want to press on our eyes, we only hurt them, but we
see nothing. And in the same way we are blinded by the violence of the
Passion that doesn't want to leave any space between you and yourself
Objects. "

"It is your spiritual adornment," I replied, "that induces you to go into
indulging in moral delicacy and the rough side of truth
not wanting to see. By doing so, you are just wrapping things in one
transfigured nimbus instead of going to work at full speed. "

»Expenditure of strength where strength is not needed promotes work
Don't, ”Nikhil said impatiently. “But why are we arguing about this
Things? Idle arguing with words only takes away the fresh pollen
of the truth. "

I wanted Bima to take part in the discussion, but see you
now she hadn't said a word. Maybe I had one for her
given a rough push, so that now, besieged by doubts, the
Wanted to do an apprenticeship with the schoolmaster again? And
yet she needed this push. Above all, one must first see
that things are not as firm as they were believed.

"I'm very glad I had this conversation with you," I said
Nikhil, “because I was just about to read this book to our queen bee
give."

"Why not?" Said Nikhil. “If I could read it, why should I?
Bimala not read it too? What I want to emphasize is this
that the people of Europe do everything from a scientific point of view
look at. But humans are more than just physiology or biology
or psychology or sociology. For God's sake don't forget that! He
is infinitely more than what science teaches of it. You
laugh at me and call me a schoolmaster's pupil, but that
you are not me Because you are looking for the truth about people
your science teachers and not your own
Inside. "

"But why all this fuss?" I scoffed.

“Because I can see that you are going out to revile people and
to reduce. "

"But where on earth do you conclude that?"

“From everything you say and do and with what you hurt my feelings.
You constantly direct your attacks against everything great and selfless
and beauty in people. "

"How did you come up with this crazy idea?"

Nikhil rose suddenly. "I'll tell you straight out, Sandip,"
he said, “you can mortally wound the person in me, but you can
can't kill him. That is why I am ready to endure everything, completely
consciously, with open eyes. "

With these words he hurried out of the room.

I stood there completely amazed and looked after him when I suddenly a
Heard the book fall, and when I turned around I saw Bima giving him
followed quickly and visibly embarrassed, avoiding coming close to me
come.

A strange creature is this Nikhil! He feels the danger
that threatens his home, why doesn't he show me the door? I know he
waits for Bima to give him the cue. She tells him that her marriage is a
Has been mistaken, he bows his head and admits that he is one
made a big mistake. He doesn't have the mental strength to be clear about it
make that the greatest of all mistakes is to admit a mistake.
He's a typical example of how idealism leads to weakness.
I do not know his own kind; he is too strange an owl! He
is hardly suitable as a character for a novel or a drama, much less
still for real life.

And Bima? I'm afraid her dream life is over now. you
has finally understood where the road it leads to
got carried away. Now it must either go on consciously or turn around.
But she will probably take a step forward soon, and then
take another step backwards. But that doesn't worry me. If
one has caught fire, the more the flames burn, the wilder the more
you run back and forth. The shock she got becomes hers
Only fuel passion even more.

Maybe it's better if I don't say much to her, but rather
just give her a few modern books to read. That way she can
gradually come to believe that a person with modern
Views that passion recognizes and honors as the highest truth,
instead of being ashamed of them and preaching renunciation. If you are at
any word like "modern" can hold it, it already becomes power
have to go on.

Be that as it may, I must watch the game until the end of the
fifth act. Unfortunately, I can't boast, just as a spectator
to be there sitting in the front of the royal box and now and then
Applause. I feel it tearing at my heart and in everyone
my nerves twitch. When I turn off the light in the evening and in bed
lying down, that's how I feel from small touches, small looks and
small words swirling around that fill the darkness. If I do
When I get up in the morning I tremble with lively expectation, it is as if
my blood runs through my veins to the beat of music ...

On the table was a double frame with bimas and nikhils
Photographs. I had taken out Bima and showed her that yesterday
blank page in which I said: “Avarice makes theft one
Necessity, hence both share in sin, the avaricious and the miserly
Thief. Don't you agree? "

Bima smiled a little and just said: "It wasn't a good picture."

"What should you do?" I said. “A picture is always just a picture.
I have to be satisfied with it as it is. "

Bima picked up a book and began to leaf through it. "If you
are dissatisfied, "I said," then I must try to find the empty one
Space to be filled. "

Today I filled it out. This photograph of me was made before
made for many years. At that time my features were still young, and
so was my spirit. At that time I still had illusions about this world
and about the hereafter. Faith cheats people, but it has one
Good thing: it gives your features a higher shine.

My picture is now next to Nikhils, because we are both not old
Friends?


Footnotes:

[16] Referred to as the unlucky day in the Hindu calendar.

[17] The last significant Sanskrit poet who lived in the 12th
Lived in Bengal in the 18th century; Author of the Gitagovinda, a kind
lyrical drama depicting the love of the god Krishna (= Vischnu) and the
Shepherdess Radha portrays in glowing colors, but from the followers of the
Vishnu religion is understood in a mystical, allegorical sense.
(Transl.)

[18] The Bhagavad-Gita ("Song of the Sublime"), one of the
most famous Indian poems, a religious-philosophical one
Didactic poem inserted as an episode of the great epic Mahâbhârata.
(Transl.)




CHAPTER FOUR


NIKHIL'S STORY

III

I've never been very concerned with myself. But try now
I often distance myself to see myself, like Bima me
sees. What a picture of gloomy solemnity does a person offer?
like me, who always takes things too seriously.

It is definitely better to laugh away your worries than to let the world go with you
To flood tears. Only in this way can the world really go on. We
enjoy our food and sleep only because we care
everywhere, at home and outside, waiting for us like empty shadows
can scare away. If we only take it seriously for a moment, where
would our appetite and sleep remain there?

But I can't scare myself off as one of those shadows
and so the burden of my care is always heavy on my heart
my world.

Why don't you stand high up on the great military road of the
Universe and feel like a part of the universe? What is Bima in
this immense, millennia-long river of humanity? Your wife
What is a woman? A blank name that you like a soap bubble with
Made great for your own breath and carefully guarded day and night
and it bursts with the first needle prick from outside.

My wife - and therefore in truth quite my own! But if they do
says: “No, I belong to myself” - should I answer: “How can
the existence? Don't you belong to me? "

"My wife" - this name suffices as proof that she belongs to me, right?
does it even become my property through him? Can be a whole
Capture personality in this name?

My wife! - Have I not cherished everything in this little world and
loved what there was pure and good in my life? I left it
not a moment from my heart that it does not leave me in the dust
should fall. What have I not sacrificed on her altar to?
Incense of worship and music of passion, on flowers that the
Spring and autumn brought me! If you feel like a
Lets the paper boat drift into the dirty water of the gutter,
shouldn't I also ...?

I fall back into my old pathos! Why "dirty"? And why
"Gutter"? Abuse words to use in a fit of jealousy
do not change the facts. If Bima is not mine, it is
they don't, and no anger and rage and arguing can do anything about it
to change. If my heart breaks - let it break! That will be the world
do not ruin - and neither do me; because man is
so much bigger than the things he loses in this life.

But that's the consideration for society ... I'll leave that to them
Society itself! When I cry, I cry for myself, not for
society. If Bima says that she doesn't belong to me, ask what
I then go to where she is who society sees as my wife!

There must be suffering; but i must by all means in mine
Are power, protect against a form of self-torture: I am not allowed to
think that life loses its value if fate is me
resets once. The full value of life must not be for the close
domestic world to be used; Success or failure in the field
my personal sorrows and joys are too insignificant to be
could bankrupt the whole great enterprise of life.

The time has come when I have Bimala of all ideal jewelry
must undress with which I have hung her. I gave my own
Weakness after doing such idolatry on her. I was too
immoderate in my desire. I made an angel out of Bimala to be mine
to increase one's enjoyment. But Bimala is what it is. It is
absurd to expect her to please me the role of an angel
should play. The Creator is not obliged to give me angels
send just because I desire an ideal of perfection
that is only my imagination.

I have to admit that I was just a coincidence in Bimala's life
am By nature, she may only be like with a person
Sandip a true marriage possible. But I am not allowed in either
say false modesty that I deserve it, behind him
to stand back. Sandip certainly has some very attractive things, including that
seemed very strong to me, but I'm sure he wasn't bigger
is than me.

If he wears the victory wreath today and I'm overlooked, then so
whoever awards him the prize will be held accountable for it once
have to.

I do not say this with a feeling of proud arrogance. The easy one
Necessity forces me to give myself all the worth that I really have
so that I don't completely despair of myself. May
therefore at least for me through the terrible experience of suffering
_to_ be given exemption - the exemption from lack of
Self-confidence!

I have learned to distinguish between what I really have in me and what I have
foolishly believed to have. The accounting is done, and that
what's left is myself - not a crippled self in
Scraps and rags, not a sick self who put on sick food
must become, but a soul that endures the worst and it
has survived.

My teacher just walked across the room and said by giving my hand
put on his shoulder: “Get to bed, Nikhil, it is
late at night."

Yeah, it's gotten so hard for me to go to bed before it's late
is and Bima is sound asleep. During the day we see each other and even talk
together; but what can i say when we're alone together in
the silence of the night? - I'm ashamed of myself, physically and mentally.

"How is it, my master, that you are not asleep yet?" I asked
back. My teacher smiled a little as he walked out and said:
“The time to sleep is over for me. Now I'm the age where
one wakes up. "

Up to this point I had written and was about to get up and go to bed
go, then I saw through the window in front of me how the heavy coat of the
July cloud suddenly opened a little and a big star
shone through. He seemed to be saying to me, “In dreamland you knot
Ties, and they tear apart again, but I'm always here - the eternal
Wedding night lamp. "

And suddenly my heart was filled with the certainty that behind the
Faithful to the curtain of physical things through the millennia
eternal love wakes up and waits for me. I have had many a lifetime
seen her image in many a mirror - in broken mirrors, in
curved mirrors, in dusty mirrors. And whenever I do
tried to make the mirror entirely my own, and carefully
locked, then I no longer saw the picture. But why is all this? What
do I have anything to do with the mirror, or with the picture at all?

My beloved, your smile will never die, and every morning
your red forehead sign will shine anew for me.

"What childish self-deception!" Scoffs some devil of his
dark corner - »with such foolish chatter one brings children
to rest!"

This may be. But millions and millions of children scream and
need to be brought to rest. Could it be that all these multitudes with
a lie to be satisfied? No, eternal love cannot me
fool, because it is true!

It is true, which is why I have seen it so often and always will
see again even where I go astray, and even through the densest
Veil of tears. I've seen them in the marketplace of life and
lost in the crowd and found again; and I will find her again
when I have escaped this life through the crack of death.

Oh, cruel ones, don't play with me any longer! If I didn't succeed
is to find you by following the footsteps of your feet on the path, the
The scent of your hair followed in the air, don't let me mourn it forever
and cry! The star that shines through the cloud cover tells me that
I shouldn't despair. What is eternal must be imperishable.

Now I want to go to my Bimala. She becomes her tired limbs
Stretched out and fell asleep, slack from everyone inside
Fight. I want to put a kiss on her forehead without her
to wake up - that should be my flower offering on your altar. I
believe, even if I forget everything after death - all my insane and
all my suffering, - the memory of that kiss would be in me
tremble, for the wreath that is woven from the kisses of love,
one day, after many existences, eternal love will crown.

When the last beat that heralded the second hour came
my sister-in-law into the room. "But what are you doing, dear brother?"
called her. “For God's sake go to bed and stop listening to yourself like that
torment! I can't bear to see how you suffer. ”The
Tears welled up in her eyes when she asked me so.

I couldn't utter a word, just touched in silence
Awe her feet and went to bed.


BIMALA'S STORY

VII

At first I suspected nothing, feared nothing; I just felt that I was
belonged entirely to my country. How exhilarating was this unreserved one
Dedication! Now it became apparent to me like the human being in full
Self-sacrifice can find its ultimate bliss.

I think that this intoxication will gradually come by itself
would have passed. But Sandip Babu didn't want that; i should him
first get to know them completely. The tone of his voice was like a physical one
Touch, each of his glances threw begging at my feet. And
behind it all burned a passion so impetuous that it made me
would have to pull out by the roots and dragging your hair with you
to like.

I don't want to evade the truth. I felt it day and night
consuming desire. There was something insanely enticing about me
to overthrow the abyss of such passion. How terrible it seemed
how shameful, and yet how sweet! Then there was my indomitable curiosity
That always drove me on. I knew so little about him that he never could
and in no way become mine, and his youth blazed in a thousand
Flames up - oh, how full of mystery was this immense, hot one
Passion!

In the beginning I had a sense of admiration for Sandip, but that
soon faded. I even stopped paying attention to him; yes i started on
to look him down. Still, my heart was an instrument that he did
knew how to play masterfully. What use was it if I was in front of his
Touch receded and even hated the instrument itself inside me; it
had to obey his spell.

I have to admit, there was something inside of me that ... how should I say? ...
something that makes me wish I had died then.

Chandranath Babu always comes to me when he finds the time. He has the
Strength to lift my mind to a height from which I am in one
Moment the area of ​​my life in front of me on all sides
see spread out and recognize where its real limits are and that
I foolishly wanted to go beyond that.

But what use is all of this? Do I really want liberation? It is as
whether I have only one prayer: may suffering come upon our house, may that
Best in me wither and wither; if only this sweet madness me
remains!

When I saw my late brother-in-law like him before I got married
madly with drunkenness his wife struck and then in maudlin
Repentance, sobbing and howling, vowed, no brandy again
to touch, and how he then sat down and ate the same evening
Drinking glass after glass, then I was filled with disgust for him.
But my high today is even worse. I need the poison
not first to procure and pour: it swells in my veins,
And I don't know how to resist it.

Must this go on until the end of my life? Sometimes I see
scared at myself and think my life is a night mar that
will suddenly disappear with all its lie. It's so whole
detached from everything that was and no longer has any relation to his
Past. I can do what it is now and how it could be
do not understand.

One day my sister-in-law said with a scornful laugh: "What a woman
touchingly hospitable housewife we ​​have! Your guest definitely wants
do not give way. In our time we also had guests; but we cared
not so much about them - we were foolishly too in
Claimed by caring for our husband. Poor Nikhil has to
atone for being too modern. He should have come as a guest if
he wanted to stay. Now it looks like it's time for him
to go. "

That sarcasm didn't hit me; because I knew it was these women
it is not given to understand the nature and cause of my devotion. The
the inspiring feeling of making sacrifices to my homeland steeled me
at that time that such arrows could not reach and injure me.


VIII

For some time, the cause of the fatherland has ceased to exist
Speech. The subject of our conversation now is the sexual
Problems of the present and similar questions, in between some poetry,
both ancient Indian and modern English, and the whole always is
accompanied by a deep basic melody I have never heard before
have, full of masculinity and compelling violence.

It had come to the point that we despised any pretext. We had
not even the slightest pretense that Sandip Babu was still
stayed there and that I had confidential conversations with him from time to time
would have. I was in a constant internal struggle. I was angry at
myself, my sister-in-law, the establishment of the world, and me
I vowed never to leave the women's quarters again, even if I did
should die of it.

For two days I did not step out. Then it became my first
Let's see how far I've come. I didn't find any taste
more alive. Whatever I touched I would like to have it straight away
thrown down again. I felt that I was waiting for all of my nerves
were tense from head to toe on something - on someone; my
The blood was feverish with anticipation.

I tried to distract myself with work. The floor of the
The bedroom was clean enough, but I insisted that it be under
my supervision was scrubbed again. The things were completely
neatly in the cupboards; I pulled them all out and arranged them
different. I couldn't even find time to clean my hair in the afternoon
I just tied it up loosely and ran around and
plagued everyone. Then I started rummaging in the pantry. The
Supplies seemed very much reduced to me, and that couldn't keep up
have done right things, but I did not find the courage to do anything
to hold someone accountable because he would not have
have to ask: "Where did she have her eyes all along?"

In short, I acted like a woman that day. The next day
I tried to read something. I have no idea what I was reading, however
suddenly I noticed that, quite unconsciously, with the book in hand,
walked down the corridor that led to the outside chambers. Now
I stood at a window across from the veranda in front of the
Row of rooms on the other side of the courtyard. I felt as if
that one of these rooms had escaped to another bank and the ferry
stopped driving. I felt like I was just the ghost
Condemned by the one I was two days ago to stay where I was
was without really being there, and always longing
staring over.

As I stood there, I saw Sandip from his room onto the porch
kicking, newspaper in hand. I could see he was awful
was excited. The courtyard, the railing in front of him, everything seemed to his anger
irritate. He threw the newspaper down with a gesture as if he had it
like to tear the whole world apart.

I felt that I could no longer keep my vows. I was in
About to go on, to the living room, than my sister-in-law
suddenly stood behind me. "Oh heavens, this tops it all off!"
she exclaimed as she scurried away again. After that I didn't have any more
the courage to move on.

When my girl came the next morning and called: "Mistress, it's high
Time to hand over the supplies, ”I tossed her the keys with the
Words: "Tell Harimati she's worried," and sat me down with one
English embroidery that I had started on the window.

A servant came with a letter. "From Sandip Babu," he said. Which
unheard of audacity! What should the messenger think of this? My heart
trembled as I vomited the letter. It did not contain a salutation, but rather
just the words: “An urgent matter - the fatherland
concerning. Sandip. "

In the same instant I had tossed the embroidery aside and was
jumped up. I arranged my hair in front of that with a few twists
Mirror, I didn't change the sari first, I just pulled one on quickly
matching jacket.

I had to go through one of the verandas where my sister-in-law was in the morning
sit and cut betel. I fought my embarrassment.
"Where to, Chota Rani?" She called.

"In the living room outside."

"So early! To a matinee, eh? "

And when I went on without answering, she hummed a suggestive
Song after me


IX

When I opened the living room door, I saw Sandip walking into one
Illustrated Catalog of Paintings by the British Academy was deepened
and turned his back on the door. He imagines a big one
To be an art connoisseur.

One day my husband said to him:

“If artists ever need a teacher, they never will
be embarrassed while you're here. ”Otherwise it wasn't her
My husband's way of mocking, but he's been different lately
and he never spares Sandip.

"Why do you think that artists don't need teachers?" Asked
Sandip.

"Because the artist is a creator," replied my husband. "Therefore
we should be modestly content with our teachings on art
to be taken from the artist's work. "

Sandip laughed at such modesty and said, “You mean that
Humility is the capital that pays the most interest. But i am
the conviction that those who lack pride are like the pipe,
that floats on the water and has no roots in the ground. "

The most contradicting feelings moved me when they talked like that.
On the one hand, I dearly wish that my husband would win the controversy
and that Sandip's pride would be humiliated. And yet it was just this one
Sandip's unbending pride, who so attracted me. He shone like one
precious diamond that knows no shyness and the sun itself
radiates boldly in the face.

I entered. Sandip heard my footsteps as I approached
but he pretended to hear nothing and did not take his eyes off it
Book.

I was afraid he would start talking about art because if he did
Speaking of pictures, I can show my sensitivity towards them
do not suppress and always have great difficulty in his speeches mine
Maintain self-control. So I was almost on the point
to turn back when Sandip looked up with a deep sigh and pretended
whether my sudden sight startled him. "Oh, there you are!" Said
he.

In his words, in his tone, in his eyes was a world of
Reproach as if the claims he made on me, my absence,
if only of a few days, made a grave injustice.
I felt this attitude as an insult to me, but alas,
I didn't have the strength to be angry about it.

I didn't answer, but although I wasn't looking at Sandip, I could
can't help feeling his accusatory look on mine
Face bored tight and would not go away. I wish him so much
would like to say something that I could find shelter behind his words.
I don't know how long this took, but at last I couldn't
endure more. “What kind of thing is it,” I asked, “what you are about
wished to speak to me? "

Sandip acted surprised again when he said, “I always have to do it first
be about a certain thing? Is friendship in itself
Crime? O, queen bee, that you are the highest thing on earth
there, so disregard! May one open the door to the worship of a heart
close like a lost dog? "

I felt my heart trembling inside me again. Now the crisis had to
come too impetuous to be turned away. Joy and fear
fight in me for rule. My shoulders would be strong enough
be able to withstand her onslaught or would she knock me down
the face in the dust?

My whole body is shaking. Overcoming me by force, repeated
I: “You called me about something that concerns the fatherland
matter what, so I left my domestic chores to hear
what there is. "

"I was just trying to make that clear to you," he said to one of them
sarcastic laughter. “Don't you know I've come to
to worship? Didn't I tell you that I am the shakti in you
see our fatherland embodied? It's not just about
our geographic fatherland. Nobody can give his life for
a map! If I see you in front of me, then only mine will be the whole
Apparently the beauty of my country. If you have me with your own
Anoint my hands, then I will feel consecrated by my fatherland;
and if I fall in battle with this consciousness in my heart, then I fall
I am not in the dust of a country that the map shows, but
my head sinks on a lovingly spread garment - knowledge
What garment am I thinking of? The red saree that you saw the other day
wore, with the wide, blood-red hem. I always see him in front of me. The
are the visions that give strength in life and joy in death! "

Sandip's eyes flashed fire as he spoke, but whether it was the fire
the enthusiasm or the fire of passion, I would not have
can say. I thought of the day I first heard him speak
and where I doubted whether he was human or a living flame.

I couldn't utter a word. It is not possible to get behind that
Barriers to external decency to seek shelter if in an instant
the fire bursts with a flashing sword and roaring laughter
destroys everything that avarice has carefully piled up. I was in
Terrified that he might forget himself and take my hand. Because
he stood before me, trembling all over like a flaming flame;
his eyes sprayed scorching sparks on me.

“Do you want to go on with your petty household chores forever?
Do idolatry, "he called after a pause," you who are in power
have in them to inflict life or death on us? Should this be yours
Power to stay hidden in a zenana? Throw away all false shyness
of yourself, I ask you; don't worry about the whispers
around them! Throw yourself into the stream with open arms today
of freedom out in the world! "

If Sandip in this way his cult of the fatherland with his
Adoration for me is woven, so my blood begins to dance, and all
The barriers that hold me back start to totter. His talk about
Art and Sexual Problems, Its Distinctions Between That
Real and unreal only had the spirit of contradiction in me
that prevented me from answering factually. But this one
Spirit now went up in flames, and with it my resistance. I felt
transfigured by my femininity and like a goddess. Why
shouldn't its shine shine visibly from my forehead? Could mine
Voice not finding a word, an audible call like one
holy magic formula consecrated and inflamed my country?

Suddenly my girl Rhema rushed into the room with her hair loose.
"Give me my wages and let me go," she yelled. "In
I've never been like that in my whole life ... ”The rest was sobs
suffocated.

"What happened then?"

It turned out that Thako, my sister-in-law's girl, was her
had insulted excessively for no reason whatsoever. She was in one
in such a state that I tried in vain to calm her down,
by telling her I wanted to come and see it right away
examine.

The mud of domestic life that is under the lotus leaves of the
Femininity came to the surface. So that Sandip doesn't do any more
When I saw it, I hurried back.


X

My sister-in-law was absorbed in her betel nut slicing, a soft one
Smiles played on her lips as if nothing annoying was going on
would. She was still humming the same song.

"Why did your Thako abuse poor Khema so?" I burst out.

“Does she have that? The woman! I'll whip them out of the house
to let. How shameful to spoil your morning like this! -- But what
then has this whore Khema for manners that she goes and you
bothers you when you're busy? In any case, don't bother yourself with it
such domestic squabbles, Tschota Rani! Just leave it to me and go
back to your friends! "

How suddenly the wind turns in the sails of our minds! That I
Had seen Sandip outside, was in the light of the Zenana Codex
something so unheard of that I didn't know what to answer and
went to my room. I knew my sister-in-law was behind it
that she had excited her girl into this scene. But I felt
me on so unsteady ground that I dared not strike back.

Only recently had I seen that I had the unbending pride with which
I had asked my husband to dismiss Nanku, not until
could sustain to the end. I suddenly got embarrassed when that
Bara Rani came and said, “It's really all my fault, dear
Brothers. We're old fashioned people and I wanted your Sandip's style
Babu didn't like it, so I told the doorkeeper ... but how
could I know that this would offend our chota Rani?
- I would have expected the opposite! But that's how I am
incorrigibly simple-minded! "

Which seems so glorious when you consider it from the height of the national cause
Viewed from below, it appears cloudy and dirty when viewed from below
sees. And soon displeasure and anger turn into loathing.

I locked myself in my room, sat by the window and thought
about how easy life would be if you were with his
Environment could remain in harmony. How easy and natural
my sister-in-law sits there on the porch with her betel nuts, and how
My natural place with my domestic ones is inaccessible to me
Duties moved! How is it all supposed to end? I wondered. I will
ever awaken from this state as from a feverish dream and everything
forgotten, or am I being dragged to an abyss from which it is in
there is no escape from this life? How did I do it, mine
To throw away happiness and ruin my life? Everyone
Corner of this bedroom that I got nine years ago as a young woman
first stepped in, staring at me in horror.

When my husband came home from his master's degree, he brought me
this orchid with that from a distant land beyond the sea
originates. Such an abundance of flowers welled beneath these little leaves
it looked as if beauty herself was her cornucopia
would have poured out. We decided to have her here over the window
hang up. It only bloomed once, but we always hoped
that it would bloom again. I have it out of habit
watered even these days, and it is still green.

It's been four years since I framed a picture of my husband in
Ivory and put it in the booth over there. If now my gaze
accidentally falls on it, I have to lower my eyes. Until the previous one
During the week I regularly took care of it every morning after bathing with flowers
as a kind of morning sacrifice that I brought to my love. My
My husband often scolded me for it.

“I am ashamed that you are raising me to a height I cannot
belong, ”he said one day.

"What nonsense!"

"I'm not only ashamed, I'm jealous too!"

“Now hear him! Jealous of whom, please? "

“To this my wrong self. It just shows that I'm too insignificant to you
am that you want to have an extraordinary man before that
Superiority you can bow down, and therefore you must help yourself by
you make a different me of myself. "

"It only pisses me off when you talk like that," I said.

"What use is it that you are angry with me," he replied. “Scold yours
Fate that it left you no choice but forced you to me
to take blindly. Now you have to keep trying to fix his mistake
to make amends by putting in me a pattern of all perfection
see. "

At the time I was so offended by this mere thought that the
Tears came to my eyes. And whenever I think of it now, I have to
I look down in front of that niche.

Because now I have another picture in my jewelry box. If I
The other day I was tidying up the living room, I took away the double frame in which
Sandip's picture was next to my husband's. I sacrifice to this image
no flowers, but I keep it hidden under my jewelry. It
casts a spell on me all the more because I do it secretly
keep. I look at it from time to time with the doors closed.
In the evening I screw up the lamp and sit there with the picture in the
Hand, staring steadily at it. And every night I want it on
Burn lampfire never to see it again; but every evening
With a sigh I hide it under my pearls and again
Diamonds.

Oh, I wretched woman! What a wealth of love each of these held
Jewelry one! Oh why am i not dead?

Sandip had made it clear to me that it is not in the nature of women
to procrastinate. For her there is neither right nor left - she always goes
straight. When the women of our country awaken from their sleep,
if he kept repeating to me, then with certainty of victory they will be theirs
Let out the call: "I want!"

"I want" - Sandip said one day - was the first word on
Beginning of creation. It was not guided by any principle
but it became fire and changed to suns and stars. It
knows no justice. Because it wanted people, it sacrificed
mercilessly millions of animals throughout the millions of years in order to
to get to his goal. That terrible word "I want" is flesh
become in the woman, and therefore men try in their cowardice with it
all efforts to contain this elemental flood. They fear that they
when she dances along laughing, all the hedges and supports of her pumpkin field
could outline. People have flattered each other at all times
this force is safely locked up within the bounds of convenience
hold, but it accumulates and grows. Now she is still calm
and deep as a lake, but gradually their pressure gets stronger and stronger
Dykes will give way, and the force that has been dumb for so long
will rush out shouting: "I want!"

Such words from Sandip echo in my heart like the blows of one
War drum. They silence any conflict in me. What
do i care what people think of me? What does that mean to me?
Orchid and that niche in my bedroom? How should they
Have power to shrink and shame me? The primordial fire of
Creation burns in me.

I felt tempted to pull the orchid down and out the window
to throw, to deprive the niche of its image and the shameless spirit
To let go of the destruction that raged inside me. Nice
when I raised my arm to do it, a sudden pain cramped
my heart collapsed and tears fell from my eyes. I threw myself
down and sobbed: "How is all this supposed to end, how is it supposed to end?"


SANDIPS TALE

IV

When I read these pages from my life story, I ask
me seriously: is this Sandip? Am I just made up of words? Am
I just have a book with a cover of flesh and blood?

The earth is not a dead thing like the moon. She breathes, and the breath
their rivers and seas envelop them. It is covered with a coat
from their own dust that flutters in the air. The viewer who from
looking at the earth outside, only sees the light that this breath and
this throws back dust. He can trace the contours of the mighty continents
not clearly distinguish.

The man who is alive like the earth is also in the mist of it
Wrapped up ideas that he breathes out. The contours of his true being
remain hidden and it seems as if he is even made of light and
Shadow exists.

It seems to me that in this my life story I am just like that
Planets only unfold the image of my ideal world. But I am not
only what I wish and believe to be - I am also what I am not
love and what I don't want to be. My creation already had
started before I was born. I had no choice about mine
Environment, and so I have to try to find out what is offered to me
To do best.

My worldview makes me sure that great things are cruel.
Being righteous is for the average person; it is the prerogative of
Great to be unjust. The surface of the earth was flat. The volcano
thrust against her with his fiery horn and so came to his height,
he did not try what stood in his way, only himself
meet. Successful injustice and natural
Cruelty have been the only forces through which the individual
or the nation has come to wealth and domination.

Hence I preach the great doctrine of injustice. I say
everyone: Liberation is based on injustice. Injustice is
the fire, which must constantly consume something so that it does not turn to ashes
becomes. When an individual or a people is no longer able to
Committing injustice, it will be swept away and upon the
Garbage heap thrown in the world.

So far this is just my theory, which I am not quite familiar with myself
have become one. There are cracks in my armor through which something very much
Soft and sensitive looks through. Because, like I said, the
essential part of my self even before my present existence
was created.

From time to time I test my followers to see
how far they have come in this cruelty. One day went
we're going to a picnic. A goat was grazing nearby. I asked, “Who
is among you who has a leg alive with that knife of the goat there
cut it off and bring it to me? ”While they all hesitated,
I went there myself and did it. One of them passed out on him
Sight. But when they saw me motionless, they touched with awe
my feet and said that I am above all human weakness
be. That is, on that day they saw the fog covering my idea, but
did not notice my inner being, which softens a capricious fate
and created mercifully.

In the present chapter of my life, whose interests differ from
More and more focused on Bimala and Nikhil every day, a lot remains
hidden under the surface. The theory that rules me shapes
my inner life; yet a large part of my life eludes
their influence, and so there is a contradiction between my outer
Life and his inner plan, a contradiction I do as well as I do
can, seek to hide, even myself; otherwise he couldn't
only my plans but my life itself to fail.

Life is indefinite and full of contradictions. We humans try
to give it a special shape with our ideas by transforming it into
to press a certain shape - into the certainty that is successful.
All world conquerors, from Alexander to the American millionaires,
find in sword or dollar the symbol according to which they are their essence
shape, and this is the source of their success.

The main argument between Nikhil and me is that,
although our motto is: "Know yourself", we both do
to interpret it in quite different ways, and consequently his
Self-knowledge in my eyes is the opposite. “If you're on yours
Gaining wise success, "objected Nikhil on one occasion," so
you win it at the expense of the soul, but the soul is worth more than
the success."

I just replied: "Your words are abstract."

"I can't help that," Nikhil replied. “A machine is
concrete enough, but not so life. If you are interested in the specific
If you want to see life as a machine, you have to
you don't pretend that you know life. The soul is not like that
concrete like success, and therefore you only lose it if you do
Chasing success. "

"Where is she then, this wonderful soul?"

"Where it can be found in infinity, beyond all success."

"But what does all this have to do with our work for the fatherland?"

“So it's the same thing. Where our fatherland is itself as
End use sets, because it wins success at the expense of its soul. Where it that
Seeing the highest and the greatest as the ultimate goal, it may miss it
Success, but it wins in its soul. "

"Is there any role model for this in history?"

"Man is so great that he not only disdains success,
but can also do without the role model. Maybe there is no role model
for it, just as little as the seed has a model for the flower. And
nevertheless the shoot of the seed is directed towards the flower. "

It's not that I don't understand Nikhil's point of view; in this
rather lies the danger for me. I was born in India and that
The poison of his idealism is in my blood. How loud I am against them
Preach madness of self-denial, I can't whole myself
free from her.

This is how we get such strange contradictions today.
We must have our religion and also our nationalism, ours
Bhagavadgita and our bond Mataram. The consequence is that both are too short
come. It is like having an English military band next to ours
playing Indian flutes. I have to make it my life's work
to put an end to this terrible mess.

I don't want the European style to dominate us
the Indian. Then we could proudly fly the flag of passion
that nature has given us to flutter up
Battlefield of life. The passion is beautiful and pure - pure
like the lily that comes out of the muddy ground. She climbs over
everything that it wants to stain up and does not need any artificial means to
keep yourself pure.


V.

One question has plagued me these past few days. Why do I allow
that my life becomes so entangled with Bimalas? Am I one of them?
A piece of wood drifting away from any obstacle
is held up?

Not that I feel any false shame about Bimala
has become the object of my desire. It's all too clear how
very much she needs me, and so I consider her quite right
my. The fruit hangs from the branch by the stem, but it is not
Reason why the stem should have the right to make them everlasting
to hold on. The ripe fruit feels like it is getting more and more dated
Stalk loosens. She saved all her sweetness for me: surrender
to me is the fulfillment of their existence, their own being, is theirs
true morality. So I have to pick them because I am not allowed to
to bring this fulfillment of their existence.

But what annoys me is that I'm getting more and more entangled. Am
I wasn't born to rule, to get myself on my own steed that
Crowd, swinging and, reins in hand, driving them like me
want and wherever I want - the price for me and for them only the
Thorns and the dirt of the road? This horse is now waiting at the door, it
impatiently scrapes the ground and chews on the teeth, and his neighing is fulfilled
the air. But where am I and what am I doing that I die day after day
miss a wonderful opportunity?

I once believed I was a storm wind and the torn flowers
with which I sprinkled my path would not keep me going
prevent. But I'm just a bee, always around the same flower
circles. So also applies to me what I said: that the color, that
man gives himself with his ideas, just lies on the surface. The
inner person always remains the same. If someone who is completely into me
could see inside, write my biography, he would prove that
there is basically no difference between a guy like Panchu and
me, or even between Nikhil and me!

Last night I leafed through my old diary ... I read like me
just got my exams and my brains from philosophy to the
Bursting was grafted. Even then I had vowed to myself
not to give space to illusions, neither one's own nor those of others, but rather
to build my life on the basis of reality. But how is
has it actually been so far? Where is the firmness? It
rather resembles a network that, although the thread is everywhere
related, but mostly consists of holes. I like
try what I want, you won't be taken away. And now
how I congratulate myself on being so sure and unswerving of the thread
follow, I get into such a bad hole. 'Cause I started
To get scruples of conscience.

“I need it, it's there; so I'll take it. ”- That's one
clear and straight policy. Whoever is powerful and energetic in his aim
pursued, it must surely reach it in the end. But the gods don't want
that such journey is easy, so send the siren compassion,
that it distracts the wanderer from the path by taking his gaze with it
her tearful veil of mist clouded.

I see poor Bimala fighting like a game in a snare
is trapped. What fear of death is in their eyes! How did she look
sore torn at their fetters! This sight, of course, should be the heart
make a real hunter happy. And I'm happy too, but I am
also touched again; and therefore I stand hesitantly and cannot help myself
decide to tighten the noose.

I know there have been moments when I would have rushed to her
be able to take her hands and press them to my chest without them
Would have resisted. If I had, she wouldn't have a word
said. She knew that a crisis was looming in a moment
Meaning the whole world would have changed. And like them in front of the cave
from which the unpredictable and yet expected break out
should, her face went pale, and her eyes glowed with fear and
Passion. If this moment had come, it would have been in him
an eternity that has shaped our fate with restrained
Breath expected.

But I let this moment slip away. I don't have with
ruthless force and assured me of what already
was almost mine. Now I see clearly that it was hidden in my nature
Were elements that openly stood in my way as obstacles.

In exactly the same way, Ravana, who for me was the real hero, also became
of Ramajana [19] is overtaken by its fate. He kept Sita in
his Asoka garden in custody and waited for them to bow to him
instead of simply leading her into his harem. This weak one
Place in his otherwise great character did the whole thing
Kidnapping story useless. A similar twist on
Scruples of conscience made him give in to his traitorous brother,
instead of being on the lookout for him, and the gratitude was that he was killed.

So the tragedy of life lies in man himself. At first
it lies hidden somewhere deep below as a tiny germ
finally to break out and to topple the whole building
bring. The real tragedy is that man is not himself
recognizes as what he really is.


VI

It is the same with my relationship with Nikhil. If I also know that
he's crazy, and laughing at him, i can't quite get away from that
Free your mind that he is my friend. First I pointed his
Standpoint just off, but lately he's started taking me too
to shame and move. So I tried, as I did before, with him
to discuss and to strike the old enthusiastic tone, but
it doesn't sound real. Yes, sometimes I let myself be led so far
that I deny my nature and pretend to be of his opinion
am But pretense is not in my nature, and neither is it
the Nikhils; We have at least one thing in common. Hence it is me
better now, if I don't meet him at all, and I've started
to avoid him as much as I can.

These are all signs of weakness. As soon as a person has the opportunity
admits an injustice, it becomes a fact and grabs him by the throat, like
very much he also tries to shake off all belief in his existence.
What I want to say frankly to Nikhil is that you can see events like this
must look in the face as great realities, and that what as
Truth has its right, true friends shouldn't part.

There's no denying that I've actually gotten weaker.
But it was not through this weakness that I won Bimala; you
the wings seared on the embers of the full strength of mine
reckless manhood. As soon as smoke darkens this embers, becomes
she insecure and confused and backs away. Then her feeling is reversed
against me, and she would love to have the wreath with which she wears me
has adorned it, take it off again, but she cannot; and so
she just closes her eyes so as not to see him.

But in spite of all this, I am not allowed to leave the path that I am
have mapped out, deviate. I am definitely not allowed to deal with the
Forsake the fatherland, and least of all in the present
Moment. Bimala and my fatherland should be one for me from now on. The
stormy wind from the west, which veils the country's conscience
has torn off, Bimala will tear the veil from the woman's face,
and this unveiling will not violate any commandment of shame. If that
rocking ship carries the crowd across the ocean and carries the flag of the
If a band of Mataram flutters above him, it will also be my cradle
Power and be my love.

Bimala will be so ecstatic when she liberates her homeland
in spirit see that her bonds will fall away from her without her
is ashamed of it, even without her noticing it. Completely charmed by
the beauty of this terrible, destructive power, it becomes none
Moment hesitate to be cruel. I have that in Bimala's nature
Cruelty perceived, which is the essential force of all being,
the cruelty which with its ruthless violence the beauty of
World.

If only women could be freed from the artificial shackles that
If the men laid them on them, we would have a living one on earth
Image of Kali, the shameless, pitiless goddess. I belong to
the servants of the Kali, and one day I will truly serve her,
by having Bimala as her incarnation on the altar of destruction
raise. I want to prepare myself for such service.

The way back is forever closed to both of us. We become each other
rob, will hate one another, but will never be free from one another.


Footnotes:

[19] Râmâjana, the second great heroic epic of the ancient Indian
Literature (next to the Mahâbhârata). The main content is like the hero
Rama his faithful wife Sita is stolen by the demon Ravana and how
he regains it with the help of the Monkey King Hanuman. (Transl.)




FIVE CHAPTER


NIKHIL'S STORY

IV

Everything rushes and waves in the flood of August. The young ears of rice
shine like the limbs of a small child. The water is in the
Garden near the house. The morning light pours like love
of the blue sky lavishly over the earth ... Why can I
not sing? The distant river shimmers with light; the leaves glitter;
the rice fields shiver with golden glow; and in this
Autumn Symphony alone I remain mute. The sunshine of the world
hits my heart with its rays, but it doesn't throw them back.

When I see myself denied the ability to express my feelings
then i know why i'm lonely Who could in the long run day and
Bear my company at night? Bimala is full of life force, and
therefore, in all the nine years of our marriage, I am not theirs for a moment
got tired of it.

My life has only its mute depth, but no murmuring noise.
Like the calm lake, I can only absorb, not tear away. And therefore
my company is like a fast. Today I can see clearly that
Bimala has been by my side the whole time.

Who should I blame for this? Like Vidjapati, I can only complain:

    August is here. The sky sobs wildly,
    And rivers of tears fall on the earth;
    And, oh my house is empty.

My house, I can see now, was destined to be empty from the start
stay because its doors won't open. But until now knew
I don't think his deity was sitting outside. I was foolish enough too
believe that she accepted my sacrifice and gave me her grace for it
would have awarded. But oh, my house has been empty all along.

Every year around this time we used a houseboat to swim over the
to float a wide area of ​​the Samalda. I often said that to Bimala
every song has to return to its basic melody over and over again. The
The original basic melody of every song can be found in nature, where the
rain-laden wind drifts over the rushing stream where the green
Earth pulls the shadowy veil over her face and her ear that
chatting water tends to. There it is where in the beginning of all time man
and women first met - not between walls. And therefore
we both have to return to nature at least once a year in order to
to tune our love anew to the first pure tone in which ours
Hearts found each other.

I spent the first two years of our marriage on our wedding day in
Calcutta, where I did my exams. But from the next year
in the following seven years we always have this day in the middle
of the blooming water lilies. Now another octave begins
of my life.

It is difficult for me not to think that August will be this one
Years has come back. Is Bimala thinking about it? she got me
let nothing be noticed. Everything around me is mute.

    August is here. The sky sobs wildly,
    And streams of tears fall on the earth.
    Oh, and my house is empty.

The house that has become empty because the lovers parted, is
but still trembling with music in the middle of its emptiness. But the house
that has become empty because hearts parted is terrible in
his silence. Even the cry of pain is not there
Place.

This cry of pain must be silenced in me.
As long as I continue to suffer, Bimala will never become truly free.
I have to release it completely, otherwise I'll never get rid of it myself
Free lie ...

I think I have now begun to understand one thing. Man has
the flame of love between man and woman is so fanned that it is over
her rightful territory has spread, and he now her
can no longer command a stop. Man has one from his love
Done idolatry. But it is time that human sacrifices were made to their
Altar stop ...

I went to my bedroom this morning to get a book. It is
a long time since I entered it during the day. A pain cut me
through the soul as I am in it today in the light of the morning
looked around. A sari by Bimala, for use, hung on the clothes hanger
finished flattened and curled. She was standing on the dressing table
Perfume, next to it lay her comb, her hairpins, and there was that too
Scarlet paste for the forehead sign! Her gold embroidered ones stood below
little shoes.

Once upon a time, in days gone by, when Bimala still had her aversion to shoes
had not overcome, since I brought this from Lucknow to her
To make you want to do it. The first time she wanted to sink to the ground in shame,
than she was supposed to go out on the porch with it.

Since then she has worn many pairs to the end, but this pair has her
always kept like a treasure. When I first got her these shoes
showed, I teased her with a strange habit that she had:
"I surprised you how you touched my feet in awe,
When you thought I was sleeping This is my love sacrifice, the one
Always touch the feet of my deity in awe when she is awake
should. "But she shrugged off, shocked:" You don't have to do things like that
say, otherwise I'll never wear your shoes! "

This bedroom - it has such a fine atmosphere that I get into
feel the innermost heart. Until today I have never known how my thirsty
Heart stretched out its roots and trusted each and every one
Has clamped the object. I see it is not enough if I have the
Pull out the main root to free my life. Even these little ones
Shoes hold me tight

My wandering gaze fell on the niche. My picture there still looks
as always, although the flowers that adorned it long withered
and are dry. Of all things in the room they are with their greeting
alone sincere. They tell me that they are only there because of it
was not worth the effort to take them away. But it may be; i want that
Welcome truth, even if it is so arid and dreary
Shape appears to me, and I want to hope for the time when I am able
gazing at everything as motionless and calmly as my picture
up there in the niche.

When I was still there, Bimala came in behind me. I turned hastily
looked from the niche to the bookshelf and mumbled, “Me
just wanted to fetch me Amiel's diaries [20]. ”What did I need her for?
to voluntarily give an explanation? I felt like a culprit
an intruder spying on a secret he is not supposed to know.
I couldn't look Bima in the face and hurried out quickly.


V.

I was sitting outside in my room and had just told myself it was
would make no sense trying to read or anything else
to keep busy - it seemed to me as if all my future days were in one
solid mass freeze together and forever heavy on my chest
wanted to lay, - there came Panchu, the tenant of a neighbor
Zemindars [21] with a basket full of coconuts and greeted me
respectful.


"Well, Pantschu," I said. "What is this about?" I had Panchu
met through my teacher. He was very poor so I thought
the poor fellow wanted this present to give himself a small tip
to get out of an instant embarrassment. I
took some money out of my purse and held it out to him, but he resisted
with folded hands: "No, sir, I can't take that!"

"Why not, what have you got?"

“Let me confess to you, sir. Once when I was in dire need
I stole some coconuts from this garden. I'm getting old and
can die any day so i have come to bring it to you
to repay. "

Amiel's diaries couldn't have helped me that day, but
these words Panchu made my heart lighter. There is still
other things in life than the union or separation of man and
Woman. Beyond that, the big world extends, and that's what you have
right measure of one's own sorrows and joys when one is in the middle of it
this world stands.

Panchu is very devoted to my teacher. I know right
probably how he struggles to find what is necessary for life. He
gets up before daybreak every morning, wades full with his basket
Betel pepper leaves, tobacco rolls, colored sewing thread, small combs,
Mirroring and other stuff that the village women love through the knee-deep
Waters of the marshland and walk over to the Namasudra district. There
if he exchanges his goods for rice, which gives him a little more,
when he paid for it. If he comes back early enough, he'll go after
a hasty meal, once more to the confectioner, where he is at the
Whipping the sugar for the waffles will help. As soon as he gets home, sit down
he goes and makes tortoiseshell clasps and often struggles with it
Midnight. And with all this bleak drudgery, he hardly deserves it
much that he and his followers eat twice a day for seven months
can. To be full, he always drinks a good portion first
Water, and its main food, are the cheapest and least valuable
Bananas. And yet the family has to spend the rest of the year with a
Get by meal.

I once thought of giving him an annual grant
but my teacher said, “You cannot face the hard lot of this man
change, you could only spoil himself with your gift. mother
Bengal doesn't just have this one pantschu. When her breasts
are dried out, the milk that comes from outside cannot
do well."

Such thoughts are thought-provoking, and I decided to give it to myself
To do the task of finding a way out of the adversity. Still on the same
Days I said to Bima: “We want to put our lives on it, the roots
to exterminate this evil in our land. "

"I see you are my Prince Siddharta [22]," she replied with a smile.
“But just be careful that the flow of your feelings doesn't end up with me too
with sweeping away! "

“Siddharta took his vows alone. I want us to do it together
to do."

We turned to other things. Basically, Bimala is
what one calls a "lady". Even if her family is not in good shape
Living conditions, so she is a born princess. She doubts
not that it is one for the sorrows and sorrows of the lower classes
another standard. Of course they are continually in need, but it is
not said that this really means "want" for them. they feel
just as comfortable and secure in their confines as the pond in his
Banks; if their limits are pushed further, only the mud comes
to the fore.

In truth, Bimala only shares my home but not my life. I
had enlarged it so much and given it such a large space that,
when I lost her, all the rest of my life seemed narrow and small to me.
I had thrown everything else in a corner to make room for Bimala
do - by being completely absorbed in closing them
to adorn and to clothe and to educate and day and night around them
to shoot, forgetting how great mankind is and how precious
man's life. When the coincidences of daily life
begin to dominate the person, so he does not see the truth
more and loses its freedom. And Bimala took these coincidences
so embarrassingly important that the truth was completely hidden from me. Therefore see
I have no way out of my misery and just keep staring at the empty one
Place that meant the world to me. And that's what this sounds like to me
August morning the old refrain in the ear for hours:

    “August is here. The sky sobs wildly,
    And streams of tears fall on the earth.
    Oh, and my house is empty. "


Footnotes:

[20] Henri Frédéric Amiel, Geneva poet and philosopher
German school (1821-81), best known for the extracts from
his diaries published after his death and a
widespread book of edification. (Transl.)

[21] The one employed by the government for a rent
Main tenant of an area with the right to sublease.

[22] The name of the Buddha before he renounced the world.


BIMALA'S STORY

XI

The change that came in one fell swoop over the spirit of Bengal
was, was monstrous. It was as if the Ganges were the ashes of the
touched sixty thousand sons of Sagar [23] who had no fire
ignite, no water could have transformed into living earth. The
Dead Bengal suddenly rose from the ashes and said: "Here I am
I!"

I read somewhere that once in ancient Greece a
The sculptor was lucky enough to have the portrait that he made with his own hand,
To give life. But even with that miracle the shape was already there
when life came into being. But where was the unit in this bunch
sterile ashes? If it had been hard, like stone, we would have it
Hope that a form could arise from it, like yes
Ahalja too, although she was turned to stone, but her humanity
received again. But this scattered ashes must be between the Creator
to have fallen through the fingers into the dust, to be blown to the wind
to be scattered. It had accumulated, but never in itself
connected. But on that day, which had come for Bengal, took
even this loose mass took shape and called out with a thunderous voice
our door: "Here I am!"

How could we have believed in other than a miracle? It was like this
Moment of our history us like a gem from the crown of one
would have fallen into the hands of a drunken god. There was no resemblance
with our past; and so we now hoped that all our want
and misery would disappear as if by magic that it was for us
There would no longer be a boundary between the possible and the impossible. Everything
seemed to say to us: "It is coming, it is there!"

So we came to believe that our story did not need a horse,
but that they go there like the heavenly chariot by their own strength
would. Nor did you have to pay the carter a wage, you had to
only now and then refill his cup with wine. And then would
we the target of our hopes in some impossible paradise
to reach.

My husband was not entirely indifferent, but while we were together
enthusiastic, he seemed to be getting sadder and sadder. It was like looking
a vision behind the surging present.

I remember one day he was at one of the
Arguments he kept having with Sandip said, “That
Luck has come to our door and knocks just to show us that
we are not able to absorb it - that we do not have everything
ready to ask for it to come to our house. "

"No," was Sandip's answer. “You talk like an atheist because you don't
believe in our gods. It has become very clear to us that
the goddess came with her gift, but you mistrust him
obvious signs of their presence. "

“Precisely because I believe so firmly in my God,” said my husband, “I am
I am so certain that we are not yet ready for his service. God has
the power to give us his gift, but we must have the power to give it
to accept. "

Such speeches by my husband only annoy me. I couldn't
contain myself to interfere: »You mean that this enthusiasm is only one
There is intoxication, but does such intoxication not give strength in a certain way? "
"Yes," replied my husband. “It may give strength, but none
Weapons."

"But strength is a gift from God," I went on. “Weapons can come from
handicraftsmen. ”My husband smiled. "The
Craftsmen will demand their wages before they deliver the weapons «,
he said.

Sandip tossed himself in the chest as he said, “Just worry about it
Not! They should already have their wages. "

“I won't order the festival music when they have paid for them
before, ”answered my husband.

“You don't need to pretend we're looking for your generosity
are instructed to do so, ”Sandip said mockingly. “Our party isn't hanging
from monetary payments. "

And he began to sing in a hoarse voice:

    My beloved who lavishly pours out his love and
        does not ask for wages,
    Plays the simple little flute he bought for nothing
    And my heart listens to the sounds until it is completely lost in them.

Then he turned to me with a smile and said, "When I sing,
Queen bee, I just want to prove that if our life
is full of music, we can do without a beautiful voice. If only we
sing because we're musical, the song doesn't have much value. Now,
as a full stream of music floods our land, let go
Nikhil practice his scale while we do this with our rough voices
Shake up the country:

    My house calls out to me: Why do you want to go outside and why do you want to go outside?
        lose your all
    But my life says: Take all your belongings and give them to the winds
        price!
    I follow the call of life, what is the good of me, what is that
        escapes?
    If I have to free the downfall, be done with a smile!
    Because only one thing I desire: the death potion of immortality.

You must understand, Nikhil, that we have all lost our hearts.
Nobody can hold us any longer within the boundaries of what is easily possible
in our hunt for the hopelessly impossible.

    Do you want to hold us
    Fools who you do not know the irrepressible lust of boldness,
    You who did not hear the call that came to us from the goal of the devoured
        Path!
    Everything that is good, straight and smooth,
    Upside down with it in the dust! "

I thought my husband wanted to continue the discussion, but he stood
up in silence and left us alone.

What upset me inside was only the contrast of the stormy ones
Passion outside that swept the land from one end to the other
to change. I felt the lord of my destiny on his
Victory car rushed up quickly, and the rolling of the wheels found one
Echoes in me. I had the constant feeling that every moment
something extraordinary could happen, but none for which
Responsibility. Wasn't I moved into a sphere where right?
and injustice and the feelings of others are no longer asked? I had
ever wanted this - had I ever hoped for or expected something like this? who
If he looks at my whole life so far, he could say that me
any fault?

All my life I have faithfully had my sacrifices at the altar
offered, - but when finally divine grace reveal itself
should, a different god appeared than the one I thought I was serving. And
just as the awakened land trembles from the cheering gang Mataram,
with which it greets the dream of the future that suddenly appeared before it, so
all pulses beat the suddenly appeared, unknown, impetuous
Towards strangers.

One night I got out of bed and slipped out of my room
the terrace outside. Behind our garden wall are ripening ones
Rice fields. To the north you can see the river through the trees of the village
shimmer. The whole landscape lay there in the darkness like it was still
dormant seed of a new future.

In that future I saw my country, a woman like me
and spy with anticipation. The sudden call of something unknown
drove her out of the confines of her house. she has no time
had to wait and think, or light a torch,
but rushed out into the darkness without reflection. I know well
like their innermost soul to the distant flute sounds that they call,
replies; how her breast billows; how she feels about this
Stranger comes closer and closer, it has already reached, so that they themselves
can plunge into it blindly. She is not a mother. She doesn't listen to that
Call of their hungry children, the dark home waits in vain in the evening
on her lamp. She rushes to her tryst, for this is the country
the Vishnu poet. She has left her home, her domestic one
Forget duties; she feels nothing but an immeasurable longing, that
drives them forward - on which road, to which goal, that applies
her same.

I too am gripped by such longing. I've lost my home too
and am lost. The goal and the path are equally dark in front of me. I feel
just how longing drives me on and on. Oh, you unfortunate
Wanderer through the night; when the morning dawns you will be left with no trace
See a way that you could return But why
to return? Death is just as good. When the dark with its flute
lures me to the abyss, what do I care afterwards? If his
Darkness has engulfed me, so I will no longer be, and with
good and bad, laughter and tears are gone.


XII

Since the machine of the time in Bengal suddenly worked at high pressure,
what seemed difficult became easy, and events followed one another
In rapid succession. Nothing could be held back, even in ours
remote corner. At first our district was back because my husband
did not want to force people. “The victims of their homeland
bring are in truth his servants, "he often said," but the ones who do
forcing others to do so are his enemies. You want the freedom of
Chop off the roots to capture them at the summit. "

But when Sandip came and settled here and his followers
began to travel around the country and in villages and market towns theirs
To make speeches, the waves of excitement hit our bank too.
He was joined by a bevy of local youngsters, including
even some who were known to be an eyesore to the village. But
the glow of their genuine enthusiasm transfigured them outwardly and
inside. It showed like all filth and mold in one country
suddenly swept away as soon as the pure breeze of great joy and
Hope goes over it. It is indeed difficult for people
to be open and straight and healthy when you are enslaved to the fatherland
Floor lies.

Now all eyes were on my husband, from his property
but not foreign goods such as sugar and salt and clothing
were banished. Even the estate officials were embarrassed about it in the end
and ashamed. And yet some time ago when he started
to introduce native articles into our village, young and old him
clandestinely and publicly reprimanded and ridiculed for his folly.
When it was not yet a fame to belong to the Swadeshi movement,
we had despised them with all our hearts.

My husband is still sharpening his Indian pencils with his
Indian knife, writes with reed pens, drinks water from one
Tin jar and works in the evening by the light of an old-fashioned oil lamp.
But such boring sugar-water patriotism didn't appeal to us.
Rather, we were always ashamed of the simple and unmodern furnishings
his reception room, especially if high officials or other Europeans
were guests with him.

My husband listened to my ideas with a smile. “Why are you moving
he used to say.

“They'll think we're barbarians, or at least they'll think we're barbarians
lack of a fine way of life. "

“If they do that, reward them by thinking of theirs
Delicacy goes no deeper than her white skin. "

My husband had an ordinary brass pot on his desk,
which he used as a flower vase. Often when I heard he had one
Waiting for a European guest, I snuck into his room and sat down
in its place a crystal vase of European work.

“Look, Bimala,” he protested at last, “that brass pot knows so
little of itself like those flowers; but this thing here serves its purpose
so loudly known, it only fits artificial flowers. "

Only the Bara Rani flatters my husband's whims. Once she comes
out of breath: “Oh, brother, have you heard? You have now
wonderful Indian soap in the village! I am beyond the years
where you can afford every luxury, but when you don't have animal fats
contains, I would like to try it. "

My husband is beaming the way he hears that, and now the whole house is with you
Indian soaps and fragrances flooded. A beautiful one indeed
Soap! Rather, it is a kind of hot soda. And as if I don't
knew very well that my sister-in-law had the old European soap for herself
is still needed and gives it to the girls to wash their clothes!

Another time it says: “Oh dear brother, get me a couple of
these new Indian pens! "

Her "brother" is beaming with happiness again, and so is my sister-in-law's room
is garnished with all kinds of hideous little sticks that stand out
Call Swadeschi penholder. Not that that matters to anybody
she should, because reading and writing is not her thing. But lies on
her writing utensils still have the same ivory penholder that
only one she's ever used.

In truth, all of this was only directed against me because I was the
Refused to go along with my husband's quirks.

There was no point in trying to convince him of my insincerity
To prove sister-in-law; his face became severe as soon as I just remembered it
stirred. You only get in trouble when you try to meet people like that
to open your eyes.

The Bara Rani loves to sew. One day I couldn't help it
blurt out: “What a comedian you are, sister! If
if your 'brother' is there, you are on fire for them
Swadeshi scissors, but you use them every time you work
English. "

"What's the harm?" She replied. “Don't you see how he is
Makes you happy? We grew up here in the house together, and so did I.
know him from childhood. I just can't take it
like you when he's not smiling anymore. Poor thing, he has no other
Pleasure as the shopper game. You're the only one who makes him happy
could do, and yet you will ruin him. "

"Whatever you say, it is not right to be hypocritical," I replied.

My sister-in-law laughed in my face. “Oh, you innocent little one
Tschota Rani! You're as straight as a schoolmaster's cane
Is not it? But a real woman is not made that way. She is soft
and flexible so that it can bend without becoming crooked. "

I couldn't forget the words: “You're the only one who makes him happy
could do, and yet you will ruin him. "


XIII

Suksar, which is in our area, is one of the largest
Commercial centers throughout the district. On one side of a water will
Market held daily, on the other side takes place once a week
a bigger market takes place. In the rainy season when the lake with the river
Connection and the ships can come up there will be large quantities
Cotton yarn and fabrics brought there for sale for the winter.

When our excitement reached its peak, Sandip declared,
that all foreign articles including the devil of foreign nationals
should be driven out of our area.

"Of course," I replied ready to fight.

"I spoke to Nikhil about it," Sandip said. "He tells me,
we can make as much speeches as we want, but he does not want coercion
tolerate."

"Just let me do it," I said, feeling proud of myself
Makes. I knew how deep my husband's love was for me. I would be
had been in my senses, I would rather have let myself be torn to pieces than
that at such a moment I would have asserted my right to it. But
Sandip should get to know the full power of his deity.

Sandip had made it clear to me in his irresistible way how that was
Weltkraft each individual in the form of a special one
Elective affinity revealed. "The Philosophy of Vishnu Admirers",
he said, “speaks of the Shakti of joy that is in the heart of the
Creation dwells and always attracts the heart of eternal love. The
Humans have an everlasting desire to get these Shakti out of the
to bring forth the hidden depths of their own nature, and those below
we who succeed immediately understand the language of the
Music that sounds to us from the darkness. "And sang:

    My flute, which oozed with songs, has fallen silent,
    Now that I face you face in face.
    My call sought you under all the heavens when you lay hidden;
    Now all my longing finds fulfillment in the smile of your eye,
        Lover.

While I was listening to his allegories, I had forgotten that I was only
was quite simply Bimala. I felt like a Shakti, as an embodiment
the joy of the world. Nothing could stop me, nothing was impossible for me; What
I touched, gained new life. The world around me was through me
newly created; because the answering call of my heart did not come first
all this gold poured out over the autumn sky? And this hero
this loyal servant of the fatherland who was so devoted to me - this one
fiery spirit, this burning power, this shining genius - him
I also created every moment anew. I didn't see mine
Presence always infuses him with new life?

The other day Sandip asked me I would like Amulja, a young fellow, and
devoted followers of him. I saw a new one at once
Light flared in the boy's eyes, and knew that he too was the
Shakti power felt in me and that it worked in his blood
had started. "What a sorceress you are!" Shouted Sandip am
next days off. “Suddenly Amulja is no longer a boy, the torch
his life burns brightly. How can your fire under the roof
Hide your home? Sooner or later they'll all of them
touched, and when all the lamps are on, what a Dewali carnival [24]
we will then celebrate here in the country! "

Blinded by the splendor of my own nimbus, I decided to be faithful to my own
To bestow this gift on priests. I thought in my proud
Arrogance that no one could stop me from doing what I really am
wanted. When I went to my room after this conversation with Sandip
When I returned, I untied my hair and tied it back up. Miss
Gilby had shown me how to brush it up from the back and all in one
Up the knot. My husband loved this hairstyle especially. "It
it is a pity, "he once said," that Providence is a poor man
Everyday people like me all the miracles of one instead of the poet Kalidasa
Revealed the neck of women. The poet might have him with one
Have compared flower stems; but I feel like a torch
that holds up the black flame of your hair. "

And at the same time - - - But why, oh, why do I have to think about all this?

I had my husband called. I used to have a hundred excuses each
Kind of devise to get him to come to me. Now that everything
which was long over, I no longer understood this art.


Footnotes:

[23] The curse that turned them to ashes had imposed
that they could not be called back to life otherwise than if
the Ganges would be brought down to them. (Note from the English translation)

[24] Dewali (proper dīpāli "row of lamps"), name
various festivals of the gods, which are celebrated with nightly illuminations
become. (Transl.)


NIKHIL'S STORY

VI

Panschu's wife has just died of consumption. Pantschu must
undergo a solemn ceremony to get away from sin
cleanse and reconcile the church. The community has calculated and
told him it would cost 123 rupees [25].

"What nonsense!" I exclaimed indignantly. “Don't get involved
Panchoo! What can they do to you? "

Lifting his patient eyes to me like a tired beast of burden,
he said: "Oh sir, my eldest daughter has to be married after all
become. And my poor wife must have her funeral. "

"Even if you were to blame, Pantschu," I thought
aloud, "you have probably already suffered enough for it."

"That is true, sir," he admitted honestly. “I had to have part of mine
Sell ​​the land and mortgage the rest to go to the doctor's bill
pay. But I do not come to the sacrifice fees to the Brahmins
around."

What could be objected to? "When will the time come?" Asked
I myself, 'where the Brahmins must atone for themselves because they
accepted such sacrifices? "

Poor Pantschu had to fight hunger all along,
now after the death and burial of his wife he gave up the fight. In
Looking for some consolation in despair, he found it among them
Feet of a wandering ascetic, and he managed to get so far in the
Philosophy to come so that he forgot his starving children. He was alive
For a while completely in the idea that everything is vain and that if it is
there were no joys down here, nor was pain real. And
one night he left his little ones in their ramshackle hut and
went on the hike.

I didn't hear about it at the time because I was in a terrible state
Crisis where gods and devils fought for my soul. My teacher
And didn't tell me at all that he was taking the abandoned Little Panchus under
had taken his roof and looked after her, although he was alone in the house
and had his school all day.

After a month Panchu came back; was his ascetic zeal
cooled considerably. Its two elders, a boy and a
Girls, snuggled up against him and asked, "Where are you all the time. Where are you?"
been, father? ”His youngest was sitting on his lap; his smallest
Girl had climbed up from behind him and had her arms around him
wrapped their necks and they all cried together. "Oh Lord",
Pantschu finally sobbed and turned to my teacher. "I can
Can't get these little ones enough to eat, and so can I.
don't have the heart to go away and let her down. What
for one sin I have only pretended to be so on my hands and feet
bound and tortured? "

The thread of Panchu's small trade connections was meanwhile
torn and he saw that he couldn't pick it up again. He
clung to the protection my teacher gave him when he returned home
under his roof and said not a word about going home.
My teacher finally had to start with it. "Listen once, Pantschu," said
he, “if you don't take care of your hut at all, it will be whole and
even come up with. I want to lend you some money so that you can get something back
peddle, and then you can repay me little by little. "

Panchu wasn't very happy about it - there wasn't such a thing
how mercy on earth? And when my teacher asked him to give him one
To issue a promissory note for the money, he had the feeling that he was
Not much interested in a support that he should repay
could be. My teacher, however, did not want to go through with him
obligate external alms internally. “Who has the self-esteem of a
Destroys people, takes away his caste, ”he said.

After Pantschu had signed the promissory note, it was his greeting
Not so respectful for a long time, also the reverent touch of the foot
he completely omitted. My teacher smiled at that; nothing was better for him,
than Panchu showed less subservience. "It is all right
that one person shows the respect due to another, "he used to admit
say, "but what goes beyond it is evil."

Panchu began to buy fabrics in the market and use them in the village
peddle. He didn't get a lot of cash for it, but what he did
Goods could be left over, in the form of rice, flax and others
Produce of the field, he used to pay off his debt.
After two months he was able to pay off the first installment, and accordingly
he also deducted some respect from his greeting. He had to
Felt that he whom he had venerated as a saint
a mere person and not even about the lures of profit
was sublime.

While Panchu was busy with these things, suddenly came the
Storm surge from the Swadeshi movement hit him.


VII

It was vacation time and a lot of young people from our village and the village
The neighborhood were home from their schools and universities
came. They enthusiastically joined Sandip's entourage
and some, in their over-zeal, gave up their studies altogether. Many of
they were free students from my school here, some of them received scholarships
from me for studying in Calcutta. They came to me and closed
demanded that I should take the strange goods from my market in Suksar
to ban.

I told them I couldn't do this.

They became sarcastic: “Like Maharajah, you would be doing too much
to lose?"

I ignored the offensive tone in her tone and was about to
answer that not I, but the poor dealers and their customers
Loss when my teacher, who was there, interfered.

"Yes, he will have the loss, not you, that is clear," he said.

"But for the fatherland ..."

"The fatherland is not the soil, but the people on it",
interrupted my teacher. “You only have their fate otherwise
granted a look? But now you want to tell them what for
Salt they eat and what clothes to wear. Why should they
submit to such tyranny, and why should we help? "

“But we ourselves only eat Indian salt and sugar and carry
Indian fabrics. "

“You can do what you want to cool your anger and yours
To satisfy fanaticism. You have the means and do not need them
to ask what it costs. The poor don't want you in it either
prevent them, but you absolutely want them to submit to your compulsion.
Under the present circumstances, every moment is one for them
desperate struggle for mere existence; you can't even yourselves
imagine how much a few pennies make for them - have so little
you in common with them. You have all your previous life in one
in a better and more comfortable compartment, and now you suddenly come
come here and want to make them instruments of your anger. I call that a coward. "

They were all old students of my teacher, so they didn't dare
to become disrespectful though they trembled with anger. They turned
to me: “Do you want to be the only one, Maharajah, who does
Fatherland puts obstacles in the way of his endeavors? "

“Who am I to dare to do something like this? Wouldn't I rather
give my life to help him? "

The spokesman smiled sardonically when he asked: "May we ask what
Do you do positive things to help? "

“I bought Indian yarn and bought it at my market in Suksar
for sale, and I also have whole bales of it on the markets of the
to neighboring Zemindars. "

"But we have been to your market, Maharajah," cried the same
Student out, "and have found that nobody buys this yarn."

“It's not my fault or my market's fault. It just shows that
not the whole country has taken your vows. "

"It shows more," said my teacher. “It shows what you
have vowed to you, only to plague others. Because others who do that
Have not taken vows, should first do everything for you so that you
that yours can hold. You need traders to buy the yarn, weavers,
who process it, and customers for whom it is forced. And yours
Method? You are making noise and the Zemindar is forcing people by force.
And what do you get out of it? You want the honor of it, and the
others should make the sacrifices. "

“And may we allow ourselves to ask what kind of sacrifices you made
another scientist asked.

"Do you want to know?" Called my teacher. “It is Nikhil himself who does it
must buy up Indian yarn; he had to start a weaving school to do it
was woven, and after its brilliant business successes to date
is to be expected that its cottons when they are so far that
they come from the loom cost about as much as if they come from
Would be gold; therefore they may only be used as curtains in his
Common rooms are used, although they are also used for this one
Purpose are actually too thin and see-through. Once your
Tired of vows, it will be you who are the loudest about it
laugh at their artistic effect. And if the craftsmanship is hers
Tissue is ever properly appreciated, so will foreigners
happen. "

I've known my teacher as long as I've lived, but I never have him like that
seen excited. I could see that the pain was growing
For a while he had piled quietly in his heart because he was so over
loves everything, and that his accustomed self-control has been around for a long time
was secretly undermined and it was difficult to hold on to.

"You are so much older than us," said a medical student. "It
would be rude if we wanted to argue with you. But please,
tell us definitively that you are determined not to use the foreign goods
from your market? "

"I won't do it," I said, "because they don't belong to me."

"Because it would cause you losses," smiled the first
Speaker.

"Because he who would have the loss must also have the decision"
replied my teacher.

They left us with the cry of "Gang Mataram".


Footnotes:

[25] Silver coin of around 2 Mk. Value.




CHAPTER SIX


NIKHIL'S STORY

VIII

A few days later, my teacher brought Panchu to me. His zemindar
had fined him one hundred rupees and threatened to take him
to chase from his yard. "What did he do?" I asked. "One has
caught him selling foreign fabrics, 'she said
Answer. He pleaded and implored Harisch Kundu, his Zemindar, to please
allow him to use his stash which he bought with borrowed money
had to sell, he never wanted to trade in foreign goods again; but
the Zemindar didn't want to hear about it and insisted that the
foreign substance would be burned on the spot if released
want to be. In desperation, Panchu broke out defiantly: “That
I can't, I don't have the means! You are rich why
don't you buy it up and burn it? "

But this only served to infuriate Harish Kundu, and he exclaimed:
"You have to teach the guy manners, give him a beating!"
So poor Panchu received a flogging sentence in addition to his fine.

"What happened to the material?"

"The whole bale was burned."

"Who else was there?"

“A lot of people yelling at all gangs of Mataram. Sandip was there too.
He took something from the ashes and called: 'Brothers! This is the first
Funeral pyre your village used for the funeral of foreign trade
built. These are holy ashes. Sprinkle yourselves with it as a sign of yours
Swadeshi vow. ‹«

“Pantschu,” I said, turning to him, “you must complain
Submit."

"Nobody will testify for me," he replied.

“Nobody will beget? - Sandip! Sandip! "

Sandip came out of his room at my call.

"What's the matter?" He asked.

“Don't you want to testify that this man's cloth was burned
Has?"

Sandip smiled. "Of course I'll be a witness in that case," he said.
"But on the other side."

“What do you mean by that,” I exclaimed, “on one side or the other
witness? Don't you want to bear witness to the truth? "

"Is what is happening the only truth?"

"What other truth can there still be?"

“What should happen! To be able to build up the truth, you need
we a whole lot of lies. Those who got on in this world
have created the truth, but they are not blind to it
followed. "

"And now -?"

“And now I want to do what you others 'give false testimony' to
call popular and what they have done, the world empires created, new ones
Established social systems and founded religious organizations
to have. Those who want to rule do not shy away from lies; the chains
of the truth are for those who will fall under their rule. Has
you haven't read a story? Don't you know that in the
enormous cauldrons in which the great political developments
boil, lies are the main ingredients? "

"Politics is undoubtedly by and large brewed in this way,
but..."

“Oh, I know! Of course you don't want to participate in such brewing. You
would rather be one of those who will end up having to deal with the mishmash afterwards
Having to choke down violence. They will share Bengal and say that
it's for your good. They will put a stop to the upbringing
advancing, and that's what they call raising the level. But you always will
as good boys sit in your corner groaning. We bad boys
but we must see whether we cannot turn a lie into a fortress to ours
To be able to build defenses. "

"There's no point in arguing about these things," added mine
Teacher a. "How can those who do not feel the truth in themselves
Realize that the highest aim of man is to get them out of theirs
Bringing concealment to light instead of constant material values
to accumulate? "

Sandip laughed. "Excellent!" He said. “A speech just like it is
heard for a schoolmaster. I know this wisdom from books
but in the real world I've seen that the main thing
of man is the accumulation of material values. The, which
If they are masters in this art, the greatest quit their business
Lies, carry false accounts in theirs with their broadest feathers
political ledgers in, daily newspapers bristling with lies
from the pile and send preachers into the world who sow their seeds of lies
spread the plague germs like flies. I am a humble student
this big one. When I was a member of the Congress Party, I never had any concerns
to dilute ten percent truth with ninety percent lie. And if
I no longer belong to the party either, so that's why I have
do not forget the basic fact that man is the goal
is not the truth, but the success. "

"The real success," corrected my teacher.

“All right,” replied Sandip, “but the fruit of true success is ripening
only in the well-plowed field of lies. But the truth grows from
themselves, like the weeds and the thorns, and only worms can fruit from
expect her. ”With that he hurried out of the room.

My teacher smiled when he looked at me. "You know, Nikhil," said he,
“I think Sandip is not without religion, his religion just works
the other side of the truth, be the same as the dark new moon
Has light, even if on the wrong side. "

“That's why,” I agreed, “I always have an affection
had to him, although we could never agree. Even now you can
I am not indignant about him, although he has hurt me deeply
and maybe it will do more. "

"I realized that," said my teacher. “I've been long
wondered that you were still patient with him; yes, sometimes it was
I am inclined to blame it as a weakness in you. Now I see that you
both, even if you don't rhyme, but have the same rhythm. "

“I don't need a rhyme because my fate turns into one
"Paradise Lost" seems to shape! "I remarked, his
Picking up pun.

"But what about Panchu?" Asked my teacher.

“You say that Harisch Kundu wants to expel him from his court. How would
what if I bought the farm and then leased it to Panchu? "

"And his fine?"

"How can Zemindar move them in when he becomes my tenant?"

"And the burnt fabric?"

“I'll get him another one. I want to see if anyone does
dares to stop my tenant from doing business as he pleases. "

“I'm afraid, sir,” interjected Panchu, discouraged, “that as long as you last
People fight with each other, the vultures of the police and the law each other
happily gather around you and the crowd has their fun, but when
when it comes to killing, it will be poor Panchu's turn alone. "

"How so? What could happen to you? "

"They're going to burn my house down for me, with kids and everything."

"Well, I will take care of your children," said my teacher. "You can
therefore trade whatever you want. They shouldn't harm you. "

On the same day I bought Pantschu's farm, and he left in good shape
into my possession. Then came a new disturbance.

Pantschu had the lease as the sole heir from his grandfather
accepted. Everyone knew this. But now one appeared from somewhere
Aunt up, with her suitcases and bundles, her rosary and one
widowed niece. She sat down in Panchu's house and got up
Entitlement to an annuity.

Panchu was thunderous. "My aunt has long been dead",
he fended off.

He was replied that he was thinking of his uncle's first wife, but
this uncle would have taken a second soon afterwards.

"But my uncle died before my aunt," exclaimed Pantschu, who took care of the matter
less and less understanding. “How did he still have time to meet for the second time
to marry? "

That was right. But Panchu should remember that no one
would have claimed that the second marriage was only after the death of the first wife
closed; but his uncle would have one while she was still alive
second wife taken. But since you had the thought of having a co-wife
living together was not pleasant, she would be hers until death
Husband stayed in her father's house, whereupon she would have become pious
and retired to St. Brindaban, whence she
now came. These facts would be both the officials Harisch Kunduz as
known to some of his tenants. And if the Zemindar only vigorously
demanded enough, there would even be witnesses who took part in this
Had attended the wedding party.


IX

I got word of it one afternoon when I was very busy
my office so that Bimala would have me called. I was surprised.

"Who did you say sent for me?" I asked the messenger.

"The Maharani."

"The Bara Rani?"

"No, sir, the Tschota Rani."

The Tschota Rani! It seemed to me for an eternity that she didn't have me
let call. I kept everyone waiting and went into the inner chambers. As
When I entered our room, a new surprise awaited mine, because when
When I found Bimala there, I could clearly see that she was cleaning herself for me
would have. The room that has been persistent lately
Neglect had taken on a somewhat absent-minded look
had regained some of its old order that afternoon
attained. I stood in silence and looked at Bimala questioningly.

She blushed slightly, and the fingers of her right hand played one
For a while with the braces on her left arm. Then suddenly it broke
the silence.

“Tell me, is it right that our market is the only one in all of Bengal
who allows foreign goods? "

"What would be the right thing to do?" I asked.

"Have them removed!"

"But the goods don't belong to me."

"Doesn't the market belong to you?"

"Rather, it belongs to those who need it to trade."

"So let them deal in Indian goods!"

“I would prefer nothing. But what if they don't? "

"Nonsense! How can they be so rude? Aren't you ... "

“I'm very busy this afternoon and I can keep up with you
Don't stop arguments. But I have to refuse
to bully someone. "

"You are not doing it in your own interest, but for the fatherland."

“Tyranny for the fatherland means tyranny against the fatherland. But that
is something, I'm afraid, that you will never understand. ”And with that I left
away.

Suddenly the world shone with a new clarity. It was me when
I felt in my blood that the earth was bearing the weight of its physicality
had lost, and that their daily task, life was towards them
received, was no longer a burden for her, but that she was in a wonderful place
Momentum swirled through the room and the rosary of their days and nights
prayed. What endless work, and what an inexhaustible source of work
Force! Nobody will stop them, oh no, nobody can ever
stop! From the depths of my soul the joy jumped up like in
Jet of water as if she wanted to storm the sky.

Afterwards I often thought about what it was that made me feel
made so excited back then. At first I couldn't find an explanation for it. But
Then I realized that the bondage I was wearing day and night
had rubbed sore inside, was broken. To my astonishment
I noticed that the hazy veil that had darkened my mind
had disappeared. I could do anything related to Bimala
To see truthfully before me, like on a photographic plate. It
It was evident that she had dressed up to give me that order
to flatter. Until then, I never had Bimala's jewelry as something of
viewed their differences. But that day it seemed to me that
in which she had done her hair in the English fashion, than sheer
external surface. What previously was the secret of their personality
carried in him and was invaluable to me, was now
out to throw yourself away.

When I stepped out of the bedroom, that broken cage, in
the golden sunlight outside, my eyes fell on the two rows
from Bauhinien next to the gravel path in front of my veranda, which the sky with
a delicate blush seemed to pour over them. A group of starlings
chatted and made noises to their hearts' content under the trees. At the back of the
In the meadow an empty ox-cart stood, tipped over, with its nose up
the ground and tail high in the air - the one of the
unharnessed ox grazed in the grass, the other had himself
lay down and closed his eyes comfortably while a crow rose
sat on his back and picked off the insects.

It was like getting closer to the heartbeat of the great earth
when I saw her in the simplicity of her daily life; I
felt her warm breath in the scent of the Bauhinia flowers, and a
Hymns of unspeakable melody seemed to rise from this world,
where all beings enjoy a freedom in which I also participate.

We humans are knights wandering in search of freedom, too
who call us our ideals. She who weaves us the banner under which we
undressing is the real woman for us. We must be the one who is us in their
Looking to keep magic net at home, tear off the mask and use it as that
realize what it is. We must be careful not to put them into the
Charms of our own dreams and longings and dress us like that through them
let go of our true goal.

Today I know that I will win. I am at the gate of simplicity
come, I now see things as they are. I have mine myself
Freedom won, I'll let others be free. In my
I will find my salvation at work.

I know my heart will hurt every now and then, but now that there
I understand his pain in all its truth, I can him
disregard. Now that I know it's only my business that has
does he still mean? The suffering that belongs to all humanity should
be my crown.

Save me truth! Never leave me to the wrong paradise again
seek the illusion! If I have to hike alone, at least leave me
go your path! Let your drum beats lead me to victory!


SANDIPS TALE

VII

Bimala called for me that day; but she couldn't say a word at first
and fought back tears for a while. I saw right away
that she had failed with Nikhil. She was so full of pride
Confident that she would get her way - but I did
had not been able to share this confidence at all. The woman knows that
Man very good from the side where he is weak, but she is whole
unable to gauge its strength. The man stays with the woman as well
Secret like a woman to a man. If it weren't for that, it would be
The difference between the sexes is superfluous and a waste of strength
the nature.

Oh, what is it about pride! It didn't hurt that one
necessary thing had not come about, but that a request,
that had cost her so much to overcome, was denied her. What
a wealth of color and movement, suggestion and deception subsides
but about this "I" and "mine" in women! That’s just hers
Beauty - it is so much more personal than the man. As the
Creator made the man, he was a schoolmaster and had his sack
full of commandments and principles; but when he got to the woman, he laid
his schoolmaster status down and became an artist who only worked with
Brush and palette works.

When Bimala stood so silent in her broken pride with hot ones
Cheeks and eyes full of tears, like a storm cloud covered with rain
laden and armed with lightning looming on the horizon, she saw that way
irresistibly lovely that I couldn't help but look at her
go and take her hand. Her hand trembled, but she withdrew it from me
Not. “Bima,” I said, “we are two comrades with the same goal
to have. We want to sit down and talk about the matter. "

I led her to an armchair without resistance. But how strange!
Just then, my impetuous passion felt one
inexplicable inhibition, - just like the mighty Padma current that in
inexorably running, suddenly by some small obstacle
below the surface is diverted from the bank it is crumbling.
When I squeezed Bimala's hand, all my nerves sounded like
Harp strings; but then suddenly the symphony fell silent.

What was it that was holding me back? Not a specific thing; it was a
A tangle of many things - nothing clearly tangible, only
that inexplicable feeling of inhibition. At least that much is clear to me
become that I cannot swear what I really am. Just
because I am such a mystery to myself, this is how I feel about myself
attracted. If I should ever get there, I am completely closed to it
recognize, I would throw it away - and bliss
gain!

When Bimala sat down, she turned deathly pale. She too had to
feel the danger she had escaped. The comet was already over them
away, but the touch of his burning tail overwhelmed her.
To help her recover, I said, “To obstacles
we had to calm down, but we want to fight on bravely and
don't get discouraged. Isn't it, Queen? "

Bimala tried to say something, but only brought a weak "yes"
emerged.

"Let's make our campaign plan!" I went on and pulled
Pencil and paper out of the pocket.

I started making a list of the Kolkata employees and
to determine each of his tasks. Bimala interrupted me before I did
finished, and said wearily: "Leave that now; i'm coming tonight
once more, 'and then she hurried out of the room. It was evident
unable to pay attention to anything. you
had to be alone for a while - maybe on the bed
lay down and cry yourself properly!

When she was gone, my passion flared hotter, as did hers
Cloud turns deeper when the sun has gone down. I felt,
that I had let the moment of all moments slip away from me.

What a pathetic coward I was! It was certainly off
gone from me in sheer disgust at my feeble hesitation - and
She was right!

While these thoughts flashed painfully through me, a servant came and
reported Amulja, one of our young people. I would like him most
rejected, but before I could make up my mind, he entered.
Then we started talking about the news we got from the
different districts, and from their struggles for foreign ones
Goods, and soon the air was cleared of all intoxicating vapors.
I felt like waking up from a dream. I jumped up, ready
to fight, - gang Mataram!

There was various news. Most of the dealers which
Were tenants of Harisch Kundu, had passed over to us. Many of
Nikhil's employees were also secretly on our side and pulled them
Wires in our interest. The Marwari merchants offered one
Pay fine if only with your current supplies
should vacate. Only a few Mohammedan traders were left
persistent.

One of them had a couple of German scarfs for his family
Bought. They were taken from him on the way and by one of our boys
People burned from the village. This caused inconvenience
given. We were ready to buy him Indian woolen fabrics for it. But
where were cheap Indian woolen items to be had? We could give him his
It's not a good substitute for scarves with cashmere scarves! He went and
complained to Nikhil, who advised him to go to court. Naturally
Nikhil's people made sure that nothing came of it being there
Lawyer himself was on our side.

The thing is: if we use the foreign matter burned
replace each time with Indian fabrics and a process on top of that
should fight through - where should we get the money from? And the best
it is here that the destruction of foreign goods still meets the need
increases and thus brings the stranger advantage. They are fine with it
like the happy trader to whom the nabob gave his crystal chandeliers
broke because he enjoyed the clink of the breaking glass so much
made.

Another question is whether we, as there is no cheap colorful Indian
Woolen fabrics there, boycotting the foreign flannels and
Perform merinos so strictly or make an exception in their favor
should.

“You know,” I said finally, referring to the first point, “we
will in no case proceed to those whose foreign substances
are confiscated to give Indian fabrics as gifts. The
Punishment should hit them, not us. If they sue us, they must
we pay them back by giving them their barns
burn down! - What scares you about it, Amulja? It's not that
The prospect of a great fireworks display, which attracts me. You must
remember that we are at war. When you are afraid of suffering
cause, go and seek love joys; for our task
then we can't need you! "

The second question I decided was that foreign goods were for everyone
Case should remain banned and we are unable to compromise
wanted to let in. In the good old days when you got these brightly colored
We did not know foreign scarves yet, became our country folk
done just fine with their simple cotton shawls, they must
learn again. You may not look so gorgeous, but now
is not the time to think about looks.

Most of the boatmen were won over to be
refused to cross foreign goods, but the main ferryman
Mirdschan, was still stubborn.

"Couldn't you just sink his boat?" I asked ours
local administrator.

"Nothing easier than that," he replied. “But how if you get me
later called to account? "

“Who is going to start the matter so clumsily that he will be held accountable
can pull? But when it comes to that, I want it on myself
to take."

Mirdschan's boat was tied up at the landing site after the
Had transferred cargo to the marketplace. There was nobody in it, because that one
General manager had arranged a conversation for everyone
were invited. When it got dark, the boat was after
it had been loaded with rubble, pierced and hit the water. It
sank in the middle of the water.

Mirdzhan understood everything. He came to me crying and asked for mercy. "I
was wrong, sir - 'he began.

"How come you suddenly realize that?" I asked
sneering.

He didn't give a straight answer. "The boat was worth two thousand rupees," he said.
“I now see my guilt, and if you will forgive me this time, so
I'll never ... "and with that he threw himself at my feet.

I told him to come back in ten days. If only we could
could pay the 2000 rupees right away, he would with body and soul
be ours. And he is just the man who makes our cause immense
Could serve if we could win him over. We never will
Make good progress when we don't have the necessary funds in hand
to have.

As soon as Bimala came into the living room that evening, I went to meet her:
"Queen! Everything is ready, success is waiting, but we need money
to have."

"Money? How much?"

“Not that much, but one way or another we have to
to get."

"But how much?"

"At the moment, a mere 50,000 rupees is enough."

Bimala winced when she heard the number, but she did
tried not to show it. How could she beat herself up again
give?

“Queen!” I said, “only you can make the impossible possible. The
In truth you have already done so. Oh that I gave you the whole greatness
Of your performance then you would know. But now
it is about something else. Now we need money. "

"You should have it," she said.

I saw that it had occurred to her to buy her jewelry
to sell. So I said, “Your jewelry must be in our reserve
stay. You never know when we'll need it. ”And as a Bimala
Staring at me in silent dismay, I went on, “This money has to go
come to your husband's cash register. "

Bimala was even more dismayed. After a long pause, she asked, “But
how am I supposed to get his money? "

"Doesn't his money belong to you as well?"

"Oh, no!" She said, again wounded in her pride.

“Well,” I cried, “then it doesn't belong to him either, but his
Fatherland from which he withdrew it in times of need! "

"But how am I going to get it?" She repeated.

“You must and you will get it. How to start it that
you know best yourself. You have to do it for the goddess
to whom it rightly belongs. Gang Mataram! this is that
Magic word that opens the door of his iron safe, the walls
break through his steel chamber and shame the hearts of those who
negligently do not follow their call. Tell gang Mataram,
Queen bee! "

"Gang Mataram!"




CHAPTER SEVEN


SANDIPS TALE

VIII

We are men, we are kings, and our tribute must be paid to us.
As long as we are on earth we have plundered it; and the more we
demanded, the more she granted us. From time immemorial we have
Men picked fruit, cut down trees, dug up the ground,
Mammals, birds and fish killed. From the sea floor, from the depths
the earth, yes from the jaws of death we have gathered what we only
could capture; have no lock in nature's pantry
we respected and left unbroken.

The only pleasure on earth is to fulfill the desires of those who
Men are. The endless sacrifices she made them are
which made them fertile and beautiful and perfect. Without these
She would be lost in the wild, she would be lost to herself
do not know, the doors of their hearts would never open to theirs
Diamonds and pearls never saw the light.

So have the men, only because they repeatedly demanded
opened up all latent opportunities for women. To the extent that they do
devoted to us, they have always attained their true greatness. Because they
all the diamonds of their happiness and all the pearls of their sorrow in ours
had to bring royal treasury, they have their true wealth
found. For men, "to accept" really means "to give," and
for women, "giving" really means "winning".

What I asked of Bimala, however, is really a great deal! First
I had concerns, because it is a property of
human spirit to be in pointless contention with oneself. I
was afraid I had given her too difficult a task. My first
The impulse was to call her back and tell her I'd rather not
make their lives miserable by putting them in all of these worries
move in. At that moment I forgot that the man wasn't the woman
may spare if he wants to make her existence fruitful that it is his
The task is to disturb the calm and passivity of their being and thereby,
that he stirs up the immeasurable abyss of suffering in her, the whole
To bring blessings to the world. That is why the man's hand and his grip are so strong
so hard.

Bimala had longed with all her heart for me, Sandip, to be a
to demand a great sacrifice from her, to send her to death. What
Was there any other happiness for her? Didn't she have all these bleak ones
Years waited for an opportunity to cry yourself to death - so
She was tired of the monotony of her quiet happiness! And therefore
As soon as she saw me, the horizon of her heart became
Clouds darkened that threatened their lives with fear and agony. If I
Have pity on her and seek to save her from her suffering, what for
then did I come into the world as a man?

The real cause of my concern is that my request is for
Money trades. It looks like begging, because money is the business of
Man, not woman. That is why I had to name such a large sum. A-
up to two thousand would have looked like a petty theft.
Fifty thousand has all the grandeur and romance of a daring robbery.

Oh, but I really should have been rich! So many of mine
Wishes always had to stop on their way to the goal,
just because I didn't have enough money. This doesn't suit me! Would be that
Fate just unjust, so I could forgive it - but such
Lack of style is unforgivable. It's not just hard for a man to like
I don't know how to start paying his rent, do I
that he carefully paid the pennies for a second class ticket
must look together - it's plebeian!

It is also clear that Nikhil's paternal inheritance abounds in him
means. Poverty would have been a good match for him. He would have together with
his faithful teacher happily in the yoke of the needy
Medium-sized companies excited.

I would be delighted if I could only have fifty thousand once
Rupees in the service of my fatherland and entirely at my own whim
squander. I am a born nabob, and my most beautiful dream
is, once, if only for a day, that mask of poverty
get rid of it and see myself in my true shape.

However, I have my serious doubts whether Bimala will ever make those 50,000
Rupees will arrive, and probably won't end up
than a few thousand. Because of me. The wise one prefers to take
half a loaf, or even a piece, than none at all.

I must return to these personal considerations later. I
get word that I am needed immediately. Something is
gone wrong.

It seems that the police from the man who took Mirdschan's boat for us
sunk, got wind. You're on him, but he is
an old sinner and should be too rubbed to cling onto.
But you never know. Nikhil is upset, and his steward is
perhaps unable to act on his own terms.

"If I get any inconvenience," said the steward when he asked me
saw, "I'll have to drag you into it."

"What snare do you want to catch me with?" I asked.

"I have one letter from you and several from Amulja Babu."

Little did I suspect that the letter labeled "urgent"
which I had to answer in a hurry, only urgently for this very purpose
had been. I am gradually learning a lot of things.

Now the task is to bribe the police and to hush Mirdschan
numbers. And there is no doubt that much of the cost of this
patriotic company as profit in the pockets of Nikhils
Administrator wanders. But I have to turn a blind eye for the moment
for does he not call his gang Mataram as vigorously as I do?

This work must always be done with leaking vessels, which is half
phase out. We all have a secret fund of ethics
Judgment kept in us, and so I wanted to know about the
Caretaker indignant and in my diary a tirade against them
Letting go of the unreliability of my compatriots. But if there is a god
I must gratefully acknowledge that he gave me a sharp-eyed
Has given mind that clears itself and the things around itself
seen through. I can deceive others, but not myself. Therefore
couldn't withstand my anger either.

What is true is neither good nor bad, it is simply true. A lake is
just the leftover water that wasn't sucked in from the ground.
At the bottom of the gang Mataram cult, as at the bottom at all
of all worldly things is a layer of mud, with its more absorbent
Force one has to reckon. The manager takes what he needs, how
I also take what I need. These make up minor claims
a part of what the big cause demands - the horse must
lined and the wheels need to be oiled to move forward well
want to come.

The length and breadth of it is that we must have money, and
that soon. We have to take it where we can get it easiest
because we can't afford to wait. I know that
we can thereby deprive ourselves of greater profit; that the 5000 rupees
of today might nip the 50,000 of tomorrow in the bud. But I
must then dare. Didn't I often tease Nikhil to say that
those who walk the paths of renunciation do not even know what
Is called sacrifice. We covetous people are the ones with every step
have to sacrifice their desires!

Of the deadly sins, lust is for those who are really men,
but the illusion that is only for the weakling inhibits them. Because this
makes that they are completely absorbed by the past and future,
but she has a hell of a way of taking her steps in the present
confuse. Those who always listen eagerly to the call from afar
and thereby ignore the call of the moment, are like Sakuntala [26],
who got lost in dreams of the beloved. The guest arrives unexpectedly
and hurls the curse that is killing them for what they are
long for.

The other day I squeezed Bimala's hand, and that touch stirs her soul
how she trembles in me too. Repetition is allowed to feel this
do not dull, because then something would become intellectually conscious
sink down what is now all feeling and music. Right now is in
there is no room for the question "Why?"

Therefore I am allowed to Bimala, who is one of the creatures who have the illusion
cannot do without, cannot deprive them of their full share in it.

As for me, I have so much else to do that I'm for
the moment must be content with it, only from the cup of passion
to sip. O man of desire! Tame your greed and practice your fingers
on the harp of illusion until it strings all the notes of the
Elicit seduction! Now is not the time to get the mug up
to empty the ground.


IX

Our work is moving forward quickly. But although we are hoarse
have screamed, declaring the Muslims our brothers,
we have had to realize that we will never succeed in it completely
to bring on our side. So now we have to suppress it entirely
and make them understand that we are masters. Now show them
teeth, but one day they will be like tame bears after us
Pipe dance.

"If you are serious about the idea of ​​a united India,"
objected Nikhil, 'you must have the Mohammedans as a necessary one
Accept part of it. "

“Quite right,” I said, “but we have to know where your place is, and
see to it that they stay there, otherwise they will become permanent to us
difficult to fall. "

“So you want to cause discomfort in order to discomfort
prevent?"

"And what did you want to do?"

"There is only one known way of avoiding arguments," said Nikhil
with emphasis.

I know that Nikhil's speeches, like the stories of good people, are always with me
end of a moral. The strange thing is that he is despite his familiarity
still believes in them with moral precepts! He is a
incorrigible schoolboy. The only good thing about him is his
Sincerity. The bad thing is that not even those of his own kind
The finality of death admits, but always a look ahead
directs.

I've long borne myself with a plan that if I carry it out
could set the whole country ablaze We will never become ours
Rousing compatriots to true patriotism if we give them this
Motherland cannot somehow symbolize. We have to
Make goddess of him. My companions understood the matter at once. "We
must invent a suitable idol, ”they exclaimed. "To invent
is no use, ”I instructed her. “We have to get one of the recognized
Appropriating idols to whom the worship of the people in the deep
dug channels of habit flow, and it to the representative
of the country. "

But Nikhil must of course also object to this. "We
must not be allowed to do something that we believe is right
We take refuge in deceptions, ”he said to me some time ago.

“Smaller minds need delusions,” I said, “and most of them
People just belong to this class. That is why one judges in everyone
Land deities to maintain the illusions of the people,
because people are only too well aware of their weakness. "

"No," he replied. “It takes God to remove the illusions.
The gods who hold them up are false gods. "

"What does it make? If necessary, we must also invoke false gods,
rather than let the matter suffer. Our illusions are still alive
enough, but unfortunately for us we do not understand our purpose
to make subservient. Look at the Brahmins! Still we like them
Treat demigods and tirelessly touch their feet in awe,
they are a power that is decaying. "

"There will always be a great class of people whose nature it is
to crawl on the ground, and that only by touching the feet of others
- be it in the form of kicks - be brought to an act
can. What a pity it is that we become the Brahmins after we
all these centuries kept in our armory and
in sharp and usable condition, now in the
Can't use the time of need to incite them on this mob! "

But it is impossible to make Nikhil understand all of this. He is
so taken for the truth - as if it were objective at all
Truth existed! How many times have I tried to explain to him that
the real truth lies precisely in untruth. Realized earlier
one with us this fact, and one had the courage to explain that for
those who are limited in mind lie be truth.

Those who can truly believe that their country is a goddess will
serve their image as a substitute for the truth. Our nature and ours
Tradition prevents us from seeing our homeland for what it is
recognize, but we can easily get ourselves to look at his image
believe. If you really want to achieve something, you shouldn't have this fact
disregard.

But this only served to upset Nikhil. “Because you have the strength
lost to walk the path of truth to reach your goal
to reach you, "he exclaimed," you are always waiting for some
wonderful gift should fall into your lap. For centuries you have
fail to serve your country and now you can do nothing else
do as make an idol of him and stretch out your hands in
the expectation that the gifts will come to you in vain. "

"We want to do the impossible," I said. “So ours must
Fatherland to be made God. "

“You mean to say that you don't have the courage for possible tasks
replied Nikhil. “You don't have any for what's already there
Eyes; you want to see something supernatural. "

"Listen, Nikhil," I said finally, extremely irritated.
“Everything you say is quite good as a moral lesson. These
Thoughts have served as milk for infants as long as the
Man was still in this first stage of his development, but now,
since he has got teeth, he needs different food. "

“Do we not see with our own eyes, like things, at theirs
Did we not dream of sowing seeds, sprout up around us?
By what force? By the power of the deity of our land who
revealed therein. The genius of time alone gives the deity its image.
Genius does not argue with words, he creates. I can only
shape what the spirit of the country gives birth to. "

“I will proclaim everywhere that the goddess dreams of me
has appreciated. I will tell the Brahmins that they are theirs
Appointed priests and that neglect of their ministry,
of which they are guilty, the cause of their downfall
is. And if you tell me I'm lying, I answer you: No, I do
tell the truth, - yes, more than that, I am telling the truth, that is
Fatherland has long expected to hear from my mouth. If I only
had the opportunity to bring them my message, you would
marvel at the effect. "

'What I fear,' said Nikhil, 'is that my life is limited
and that the effect you speak of is not the ultimate effect
is. It will have after-effects that will not show up immediately. "

“I am only concerned with the effect that will have on today
extends. "

"I am concerned with the effect that extends to eternity",
answered Nikhil.

Nikhil may also have got his share of Bengal's most beautiful
Gabe, the imagination, but it has overgrowth and almost suffocated
let go of a foreign plant, an embarrassing one
Conscientiousness. Just think of the Durga service, the
Bengal has grown to such height. It's one of his greatest
Services. I could swear Durga is a political goddess
and originally the Shakti of patriotism meant at the time when
Bengal prayed for liberation from Muslim rule.
What other province of India has succeeded, for the ideal, according to the
it strove to find such a wonderful symbol?

Nothing revealed more clearly how fully Nikhil was this divine gift
Has lost imagination when the answer he gave me. "During the
Mohammedan rule, "he said," the Mahrats [27] and
Sikhs [28] successes from the arms they had taken up themselves. The
Bengal was content to put weapons in the hands of the goddess and
Mumbling incantations; and since his country doesn't really have one
Goddess was, so the only thing that came out for him was her
hewn heads of sacrificial goats and buffalo. As soon as we get the welfare
seek our country in the way of righteousness, he will
bigger than our country, grant us true success. "

The dangerous thing about it is that Nikhil's words are on paper
always look so beautiful. However what I say is not meant to
to be scribbled on paper, but should go deep into the heart of the
In the country. The scholar leaves us his in printer's ink
Treatise on agriculture; but the farmer digs with the sharp one
Sickle of his plow digging his work deep into the ground.


Footnotes:

[26] Sakuntala was after the king, her lover, with whom
Promise to have them brought back to his kingdom, so
in thought of him that she lost the reputation of the hermit as a guest
came to her, overheard. The hermit cast a curse on her that the
Object of her love she should completely forget.

[27] A warlike tribe in the interior of India, who died in 1648
the rule of the great mogul shook off, successful campaigns of conquest
undertook and played a dominant role for a century.
(Transl.)

[28] Originally a religious sect founded by Baba
Nanak (1468-1539), the union of Islam and Hinduism
aspired to. She turned into under the pressure of persecution
a fanatical warrior state, which for a long time with varying successes against
fought against the rule of the Grand Mughal and finally settled with the
Mahraten shared in their inheritance. (Transl.)


X

When I first saw Bimala again afterwards, I immediately hit him
high notes. “Did we succeed,” I began, “with all my heart
to believe the God we have been seeing for millions of years
have waited to serve him and who is now finally us in
visible form? "

"How many times have I told you," I went on, "that I, if I am you
never saw my whole fatherland as a unit
would have recognized. I don't know yet if you understand me correctly.
The gods are only invisible in their heaven, on earth they show
the mortals. "

Bimala gave me a strange look when she said seriously, “Yes, I understand
You, Sandip. ”It was the first time she'd given me Sandip
called.

“Krishna,” I went on, “usually only uses the Arjuna as his own
Had known the charioteer, revealed himself to him one day in
His divine form, and that day Arjuna saw the truth.
I have seen your divine form in my country. The
Ganges and the Brahmaputra are the golden chains that are in many
Wrap coils around your neck; in the edge of the forest on the distant banks of the
dark river I saw the dark lashes of your eyes; the
changing shine of your sari shone in the play of light and me
Shadows on the rolling green cornfield, and the burning one
Summer heat in which the sky lies there, breathing hard, like a
impoverished lion in the desert, nothing is cruel but yours
scorching embers. "

“Now that the goddess gave her priest her presence in such a wonderful way
Has revealed her shape, it is my task to spread her across the country
Preach ministry, and then the land will come to life.

»› Your image shall be enthroned in all temples ‹[29]. But our people have
not yet recognized the truth. So I want it on your behalf
and put up a picture of the goddess in our temples, the
no one can fail faith. O my goddess, give me power
to!"

Bimala had closed her eyes and was sitting there like a stone image. Would have
If I had spoken further, she would have frozen in rapture. If I
was silent, she opened her eyes and mumbled along as if stunned
staring look: "O wanderer on the path of perdition! Who can your
Stop steps? I can see that no one can stop your desires
does. Kings will lay their crowns at your feet, the rich will be
hurry to open their treasure to you; who have nothing more
will ask to give their lives for you. O my king, mine
God! I don't know what you see in me, but I have it
The immensity of your greatness recognized in my heart. Who am I what
am I in front of you Oh, how terrible is your destructive force! I
will not truly live until it completely destroys me. I can do it
can't stand it any longer, my heart breaks. "

Bimala slipped from her chair and clutched my feet, and then broke
them into unstoppable sobs.

Now this is really hypnotism - the magic with which one is the
World subjugates! You don't need a weapon, just one
irresistible power of suggestion. Who else says: “The truth will be
triumph? ”[30] No, it is the deception that gives the ultimate victory
carries away. The Bengal recognized this when he saw the picture of the
ten-handed goddess riding a lion and her service in
spread throughout his country. Now Bengal needs a new idol
invent to captivate and conquer the world. Gang Mataram!

I gently picked Bimala up and lowered her to her chair, and out
I started again without fear of a reaction
Time to lose: »Queen! The divine mother has my duty
ordered to build her a temple in this land. But oh, I am
poor!"

Bimala was still extremely excited. Her eyes glowed darkly, hers
Voice was hoarse when she replied, “You poor? Doesn't belong to anything
each of us owns, you? What do I have my boxes of jewels for?
Take all of my gold and gems for your worship!
I don not need you!"

Bimala had already offered me her jewelry once. I used to do otherwise
to set no limits, but I felt that I had to [31]. I
knows why I hesitate here. It is fitting for a man to give jewelry to a woman
give; it hurts his manhood when he accepts it from her.

But I mustn't think about myself. Do I accept it? He is supposed to be
Sacrifice to be laid at the feet of the Divine Mother. Oh, there should be one
great sacrifice celebrations will be like the country has never seen before
Has. It should become a milestone in our history. She should be mine
be the ultimate legacy to the nation. Ignorant people pray
Gods on. I, Sandip, will _create_ them.

But all of this is still a long way off. How do we respond to the need of the
Right now? At least three thousand rupees are absolutely necessary
five thousand would do just fine. But how in the world could
I now speak of money after our thoughts have soared
have taken? And yet time is precious!

I was forcing all concerns down when I jumped up and shouted:
"Queen! Our means are exhausted, our work will fail! "

Bimala winced. I saw she was thinking of the impossible 50,000
Rupees. What a burden she must have had on her heart all along
to have! Perhaps she had moaned under it on sleepless nights.
What else did she have to offer as a sacrifice of her love? Since they don't me
could lay her heart at her own feet, she longed for this
Sum that was so hopelessly large for her, to bear her
to make trapped feelings. The thought of what they suffered
had to, agonizingly touched my conscience; because she was completely mine now. The
The roots of the plant were torn out of the ground and with it that
Worst done. Now all that was needed was careful maintenance and
Food.

“Queen!” I said, “right now we have the 50,000 rupees
not exactly necessary yet. I think that we meanwhile with 5000 or
even get by with 3000. "

She was freed from an alp. "I'll get you 5000," said
she in a tone as if she wanted to break out into a jubilee song - into that
Song that Radhika sang in the Vishnu songs:

    I want to look for the flower of all flowers,
    That it adorns the dark braids as an ornament,
    When the beloved approaches.

- it's the same way, the same song: I want to bring five thousand!
I want to decorate my hair with this flower!

It is the restraint of the flute that makes this song sound
gives. I mustn't blow my desire too hard into her pipe
otherwise, I'm afraid, instead of the music, the question would sound:
"Why?" "Why so much?" "Where should I get it from?" - completely different
Sounds as the song that Radhika sang! So I'm right when I say
the illusion alone is real - it is the flute itself while
the truth is nothing but its empty cavity. Nikhil got into this
have to feel this mere emptiness recently - you can see it in him
Expression on his face that even touches me painfully. But
Nikhil used to boast that he cared about the truth,
while boasting that I would not let the illusion be stolen from me
wanted. Now everyone has what they want; what is there to complain about?

In order not to tear Bimala's heart out of the thin air of idealism,
I broke off any further discussion of the 5000 rupees. I came
back to the demon-destroying goddess and her worship
speak. When should the ceremony take place and where? In Ruimari,
a place belonging to Nikhil's territory finds one once a year
large mass is held where hundreds of thousands of pilgrims gather. The
would be a great occasion for the grand opening of the
Cult of our goddess.

Bimala glowed with enthusiasm. This wasn't that
Burning foreign substances or even burning them down
Barn, so even Nikhil couldn’t mind, - so said
you. But I was smiling inside. How little these two people
have lived together day and night for the whole nine years of
know each other! You may know something of your home life
but when it comes to external things, they are quite at a loss. you
have lived in the beautiful delusion that the home and the outside world are in
in perfect harmony. Today they must to their chagrin
Realize that it is too late to make up for years of neglect and
to bring both together in harmony.

But what does it do? May those who made the mistake of
Clash with the world recognize their error! What do I care about theirs
Need? For the moment it becomes a nuisance to me, Bimala even longer as one
To let the tethered balloon float in higher regions. It is better me
put the money thing in order first.

When Bimala got up to leave and was already near the door, said
I just incidentally: "And as for the money ..."

Bimala stopped, and looking around for me, she said, “End this
Month when I get my monthly allowance ... "

"That would be way too late, I'm afraid."

"When do you need it?"

"Tomorrow."

"Good - you should have it tomorrow."


Footnotes:

[29] Quoting from the national anthem Gang Mataram von Bankin
Tschatterdschi.

[30] A quote from the Upanishads.

[31] A world of feelings hangs on the ornament of the
bengali women. He not only bears witness to love and
Respect for the giver, it is also worn as a symbol for everything
what is most valued in women - the constant concern for that
Well-being of her husband, the successful performance of all material and
spiritual duties imposed on her by the household. If the husband
dies and responsibility for the household is passed on to other hands,
then the widow throws aside all her jewelry, as a sign that she is
renounced all worldly interests. But at every other time it is
Refraining from jewelry is always a sign of dire need and appeals
as such loudly to the chivalry of every Bengal,
who happens to be a witness of it. (Note from the English translation)




CHAPTER EIGHT


NIKHIL'S STORY

X

The local papers have started sending articles and letters against me
publish, and I hear that cartoons and diatribes
should follow. Wit and humor take out their cockiness on me, and over and over
the lies that are being spread in this way make the whole thing curl
Land of laughter. They know they have the monopoly that people have with
Throwing dirt and the harmless passer-by won't come
unsullied by it.

They say that all of my mansion, from the highest to the
lowest, friends of the Swadeshi movement, but out of fear
I don't dare to admit myself as such. The few, the brave
were enough to defy me, have all the harshness of my persecution
need to feel. I am in secret with the police and
with the magistrate, and this desperate effort to mine mine
Everyone is supposed to acquire inherited titles and a foreign one
Have a chance of success.

On the other hand, the newspapers of praise are full of the Zemindars
Kundu and Tschakravarti, the loyal sons of the fatherland. If
the country only had a few more such brave patriots, it is said,
so the Manchester factories would soon make their own funeral song
Sing Mataram to the tune of the gang.

Then follows in blood-red letters a list of the treacherous Zemindars,
whose treasure houses were burned because they didn't do the thing
wanted to support. “The holy fire,” it goes on, “is
called to fulfill its sacred calling and purify the land,
and other forces are at work to ensure that those who
are not true sons of the motherland, no longer rely on its
Spread your lap. ”The signature is evidently a pseudonym.

I noticed that our students were behind it, so I left a few
call from them and show them the letter.

One of the students told me gravely that they had too
heard that a band of determined patriots had come together
the ruthless every obstacle faced by the Swadeshi movement
opposed wanting to get out of the way.

“If only one of our compatriots to this daring fellow
If a victim falls, "I said," it really means defeat
of our fatherland. "

"We don't understand, Maharajah," said a student of the
History.

I tried to give them my opinion.

“Our fatherland,” I said, “is brought to the brink by sheer fear
of the abyss - fear of the gods down to fear
in front of the police; and if you now in the name of freedom another
Set up bogeyman - whatever you may call it - if you,
counting on the weakness of your fatherland, it through open violence
If you want to submit to your will, no one who can subordinate his fatherland
really loves to be on your side. "

"Is there any country?" Asked the history student further,
“For a reason other than the fear of his government
subject? "

“The freedom that reigns in a country,” I replied, “is possible
measured according to the degree to which the fear prevails there. Where yours
Rule is limited to those who want to rob and plunder, there
the government can boast of the violence of the people
To have freed people. But where fear should watch over it like that
People dress wherever they trade and what they eat
one does not respect human free will and destroys that
Humanity at its roots. "

“Isn't that kind of coercion also exerted on the in other countries
The history student asked further.

"Who denies this?" I exclaimed. “But in all of these countries he has
Man first have to destroy his humanity in order for slavery
could thrive. "

'Don't rather prove it,' interjected an older student, 'that
Slavery is innate in man and a fundamental fact of his nature
is? "

"Sandip Babu made it very clear," said a third.
“He gave us the example of your neighbor, the Zemindar Harisch Kundu.
You wouldn't even pay a single ounce of foreign money on his property
Find salt. Where does this come from? Because he always has an iron fist
ruled. For those who are slaves by nature it is the greatest misery
when they lack a strict gentleman. "

"Oh, sir," said a younger student, "you haven't heard of him
unruly tenants of the other Zemindar around here,
Tschakravarti, heard legal action against him until he was in
was it in dire straits? When he finally had nothing more to eat
he went out to sell his wife's silver jewelry,
but no one dared to take it from him. Then Tschakravartis offered him
Maintain five rupees for everything together. You were worth over thirty
but he had to accept the trade or starve to death. After the
When the steward had taken the things from him, he said coldly that these five
Rupees should be credited on his rent! When we that
heard we were so outraged that we talked to Chakravarti or his
Stewards didn't want to have anything more to do, but Sandip Babu told us
if we wanted to throw aside living people like that, we had to
we finally get the dead from the cremation places to
to fight our cause! Living people like this, he proved to us,
know what they want and how to achieve it - they are them
born ruler. Those who have no wishes of their own have to
submit to the wishes of such people or perish by them.
Sandip Babu contrasted them with Kundu and Tschakravarti
You, maharajah. You, he said, will be with all your good ones
Intentions never succeed, the flag of the Swadeshi movement on yours
Area to be planted. "

“I want,” I said, “to plant something bigger. I am not up to
dead stakes do, but living trees, and these take time
to grow. "

"I'm afraid, sir," said the history student scornfully, "you
will get neither stakes nor trees. Sandip Babu teaches quite correctly,
that you have to grab it if you want something. We need everyone
some time to learn this because it contradicts what we're in the
Have learned school. I saw one of them with my own eyes
Harisch Kundus tenants one of the tenants who nothing else
had more to sell, forced to give up his young wife! To buyers
it was not lacking, and the Zemindar's demand was satisfied. I
can tell you, sir, the sight of the desperate man left me
don't sleep all night! But whatever my feeling said was so much
I realize that the man who will get the money that he wants to have
knows, and should he also sell his debtor's wife - that
this is a better man than me. I admit that I don't have to
would be able, I'm a pushover, my eyes filled at the
Seeing such distress with tears. But if anyone is our country
can save, so it is these Kunduz and Tschakravartis and their people. "

I couldn't find words to express my horror. “If what you're saying is true
is, "I exclaimed," so I see clearly that it is the task of my life
must be to save the fatherland. Slavery that took us to the core
has penetrated, comes on this occasion as appalling tyranny
to break out. You are so used to yourselves out of fear of power
submit that for you the belief in the necessity of
Submission of the weaker has become a kind of religion. My fight
against this weakness, against this hideous cruelty
be directed. "

These things, which are so simple to ordinary people, are confusing
itself incredibly in the minds of students, and the only purpose
their historical sophistries seems to be the truth too
twist!


XI

Pantschu's alleged aunt troubles me. It will be hard
convict them of fraud, because although it is often difficult or
it is impossible to find witnesses to a real event, so
There are always innumerable things to do for something that never happened
Bring evidence. The purpose of this move is obvious
to reverse the sale of Pantschus Lachthof to me.

Since I couldn't find any other way out, I thought of it, Panchu
To allocate a piece of land in lease and a hut in my area
to build on it. But my teacher didn't want to hear about it. He
said that I should not be goodwill towards such malicious conduct
give in, and agreed to take matters into his own hands
to take.

"You, master?" I exclaimed in great surprise.

"Yes, I do," he repeated.

I couldn't imagine my teacher doing anything
could do against these legal intrigues. He didn't come that evening
as usual to me at the usual hour. When I asked about him
I learned from his servant that he was carrying a small suitcase in which he
had packed a few things and some bedding, left and in
will be back a few days. I thought that maybe he was
opened to witnesses in the village where Uncle Panchus lived
to find. But such an undertaking seemed completely hopeless to me ...

During the day I forget about my work. But again
Slowly advancing late autumn afternoon and the colors in the sky dull
become clouded my feelings too. There are many in this world
whose soul lives in stone houses - they need to be outside
not to worry. But my soul lives under the trees in the open
Field; she takes the messages that the free winds bring,
indirectly in itself, and the whole gamut of light and dark
finds echo and answer in its innermost depth.

As long as the bright day shines around me and I'm in the middle of the gears
I am human, it seems as if nothing is missing in my life. But if
the colors fade on the horizon and the sky drapes over his
Window draws, then my heart feels that the evening is like a for me too
The curtain goes down to shut out the outside world and close the hour
announce where the darkness must fill with the one. Earth, heaven
and water call it to us, and I can not hear her call
close. So when the twilight gets deeper and deeper like the gaze
from the dark eyes of the beloved, my whole being tells me that
work alone cannot be the true meaning of life that it
alone should not be the content and purpose of human existence, because
man should not be a mere slave - not even the slave
of the truth and the good.

Oh, Nikhil, where has that part of himself gone that otherwise, when?
The day's work was done, under the starry sky all the shackles of
threw himself and plunged into the infinite depths of the night
Dark? How terribly lonely is he who is in the multiplicity
the companion of life is missing!

The other night, at the time when day and night are on the threshold
encounter, I didn't have to work at the moment, nor was I to
Work hung up, and my teacher wasn't there to help me either
Keep company. My heart was like an empty one
Boat looking for an anchorage, and so I strolled the inner one
Gardens too. I love the chrysanthemums very much, and on one side of the
Parkes I have whole rows of them in all varieties on the wall
let them set up in pots one behind the other. When they bloomed, saw
it looks as if a green wave is in foam of all the colors of the rainbow
dissolved. I haven't been to this part of the park for a long time
come and the thought of my chrysanthemums after a long separation
to see again filled me with joyous anticipation.

When I entered, the full moon was just looking over the wall, the foot of which was still there
lay in deep shadow. It was as if he were standing on his toes from behind
would have crept up and willfully smiling at the darkness's eyes
hold up. As I approached the terrace of chrysanthemums, I saw
in front of it a figure stretched out in the grass. My heart suddenly stopped.
The figure, too, straightened in alarm as I approached my steps
on.

What should I do right now? I wavered whether I was still
should withdraw quickly. Bimala, too, evidently pondered how
she could escape me. But it seemed just as awkward to me now
to go away, how to stay. Before I could make up my mind, I stood
Bimala up, threw the end of her sari over her head and walked away
inner chambers too.

This short pause was enough to relieve me of all the misery of Bimala
to make clear. And immediately the lament of my own life stopped. I
exclaimed: "Bimala!"

She started and stopped, but did not turn around. I kicked
added and stood in front of her. Her face was in shadow, the moonlight fell
on mine. She had lowered her eyes, her hands cramped
compressed.

“Bimala,” I said, “why should I try you in this one
hold locked cage with me? I don't know that you
must pass away from grief and longing in this way? "

She stood still without lifting her eyes or saying a word.

“I know,” I went on, “that if I tied you up by force
wanted to hold, my whole life would be nothing more than one
iron chain. What joy could I get from it? "

She was still silent.

“So I tell you sincerely, Bimala,” I concluded, “you are free. What
always I have been to you or have tried in vain to be,
I don't want to be your fetter. ”And with that I went to the outer ones
Chambers.

No, no, it wasn't a magnanimous impulse, nor was it
Indifference. I just saw that I never would
would be free as long as I leave others in bondage. I would have
tried to keep bimala around my neck like a jewelry chain, like that
would have pressed this chain like a heavy burden on my heart. I have
not prayed from the bottom of my soul that I will willingly give my lot to myself
take and forsake happiness or welcome pain
wanted if only I shouldn't live in bondage? If you
forcibly clings to the lie and does not want to give up the belief,
that it is truth, one strangles oneself. May I before
such self-destruction be preserved!

When I entered my room, I found my teacher waiting there. My
excited feelings still surged in me. "Freedom, master," I began
without a word of greeting or the question, "This is freedom
Highest for man. Nothing can be compared with her - at all
Nothing!"

Surprised by this outburst, my teacher looked up at me in silence.

"You can't understand anything from books," I went on. “We read in
the scriptures, that our desires are fetters that are so good
bind ourselves like others. But such words in themselves are so empty.
It only becomes the moment we let the bird out of the cage
we realize how unfree the bird had made us. What we imprison it
be what it is, binds us with desire whose bonds are stronger than
iron chains. I tell you, master, this is what people do
never want to understand. They're all trying to reform something
what is outside of themselves. But it is one's own desires that do
need to be reformed, nothing else, nothing else! "

“We think,” he said, “that we are our own masters when we do that
Object of our desires in our hand, but in
In truth, we are only our own master if we succeed in being our own
To free our hearts from our desires. "

“If we put all of this into words, Master,” I went on, “so
it sounds like some sterile old age wisdom, but when we look at it
to really understand something of it, we see that it is amrita, that is
Gods drank and became immortal. We can only do beauty
recognize when we release them. It was Buddha who conquered the world
not Alexander, - this is wrong if we put it in dry prose
say, - oh, when will we be able to sing it out into the world? When
all these innermost truths of the universe will overflow
the pages of the printed books and become a sacred stream
unite? "

Suddenly it occurred to me that my teacher was going away for the last few days
had been and I have not yet found out the reason for his absence
would have. I was a little ashamed of my thoughtlessness and asked
him: "And where have you been all this time, master?"

"By Panchu," he replied.

"Really!" I exclaimed. "Have you been there all these days?"

Yes. I wanted to be with the woman who calls herself his aunt
Come to an understanding. She couldn't believe it was among the
Would such owls like the one who gave hospitality to them
was looking for. When she saw that I really meant to stay
she began to be a little ashamed of herself. “Mother,” I said, “you will
don't get rid of me even if you treat me badly! And as long as I
stay, Panchu stays too. Because, don't you, you have to
Realize that I can't just watch it when his
motherless little ones are put on the street? "

She listened to me for a few days when I talked like that without a yes or no
to say no. This morning I saw that she was about to deliver her bundle
lace. "We want to go back to Brindaban," she said. "Give us
the money for the trip! I know they are not going to Brindaban
and that their travel expenses will be a handsome sum.
That's why I come to you. "

"The amount she demands should be paid to her," I said.

"The old woman isn't all that bad," said my teacher thoughtfully.
“Panchu was unsure of her caste and would not have that
she touched the water jugs or anything of his belongings. So
they quarreled constantly. When she saw that I had nothing against hers
Had touch, she cared for me with great devotion. she is a
excellent cook! "

“But all the rest of Panchu's respect for me waned. Until the very end
had he still believed that I was at least a harmless and simple-minded
Be human. But here he now had to see how I was completely harmless
risked my caste in order to use the old woman for my purpose
win. If I had tried to overtake her by somehow
had drilled a testimony into someone, that would be different
been. Stratagem must be countered with ruse. But that you can
practices at the expense of orthodoxy is more than he can bear! "

“In any case, I have a few days to go after the woman has left
stay with Panchu, because Harisch Kundu may be planning a new one
Devilry off. He said to his satellite that he was content
would have to provide Pantschu with an aunt, but I would even be ready
gone to get him a father. Now he wanted to see how many
Fathers were part of it to save him! "

“Whether we can save him or not,” I said, “if we can
perish trying to make our fatherland out of the thousand
To save the snares that these people gave him from religion, custom and
Turn selfishness, so our end will be happy. "


BIMALA'S STORY

XIV

Who would have thought that so much would happen in this one life?
could? It seems to me as if I have a whole series of existences
lived through; the time has passed so quickly without my noticing
until the other day I suddenly woke up as if from a dream.

I knew there would be an argument between us than I did
I decided to ask my husband to take the foreign goods from
to banish our market. But I firmly believed I wouldn't
need to convince him with reasons, the magic of me
leaked would already have an effect. Wasn't that huge
Man like Sandip, helpless at my feet, like the mighty one
Ocean wave breaking on the shore? Did I call him? No mine
Magic had drawn him. And Amulja, the poor dear boy, as
he saw me first, how was the stream of his life glowing red
flared up like the river at sunrise! Verily I have
felt how a goddess must feel when she looks at the radiant
Looks down on the face of her priest.

In the proud confidence this evidence of my power has given me,
I prepared to face my husband like one
thunderstorm-pregnant cloud. But what happened? Never in all of these nine
Years ago I saw such a cool, strange look in his eyes - like
the desert sky that looks dry and impassive at everything. It
would have been such a relief if he had flared up in anger
would! But I saw no way of getting close to him. I felt
as in a dream, in a dream on which only the darkness of the night
would follow.

I used to envy my sister-in-law because of her beauty.
I felt then that Providence had no power of its own
would have given that all my strength lay in love with mine
Husband gave me a present. Now that I am running low on the cup of power
had emptied and could no longer do without her intoxication, I thought
suddenly shattered in pieces at my feet and nothing shone
worth more of my life to me.

How feverish I had struggled with my hair that day! O
Shame and shame on me! My sister-in-law had when she
came by and exclaimed: "Well, Tschota Rani, your hair is shining in her."
Wanting to fly in the air. Just be careful that it's not your head either
takes away! "

And then the other day in the garden, how easy it was for my husband to get to me
say that he would release me! But leave freedom - empty freedom -
give and take so easily? It's like putting a fish in the
Air set in freedom - because how can I outside of the atmosphere
loving care that always surrounded me, live and breathe?

When I went into my room today I only saw furniture - only that
Bedstead, only the mirror, only the clothes rail - not the soul,
which otherwise permeated and dominated the whole thing. Instead it was there
Freedom, just freedom, just emptiness. A dry river bed in which
all the rocks and pebbles lay bare. No feeling, just furniture!

When I was in a state of extreme distress and myself
asked if I had any truth in my life at all
had stayed and where it could be, I ran into it again by chance
Sandip. Then life met life, and the sparks sparkled as they did
otherwise done. Here was truth - boisterous truth that foamed in
the empty river bed collapsed and flooded all borders - truth,
which was a thousand times truer than the Bara Rani with her girl Thako and
their foolish songs and than all the others who chattering and
running around laughing ...

"Fifty thousand!" Sandip had demanded.

"What are fifty thousand?" My heart cried, intoxicated. “You should
to have."

How and where should I get it? Those were secondary questions to that
were initially out of the question. How was it with me? Was
I haven't been lifted up out of my nowhere in an instant
a height that towered above everything? So everything will be on my wink and
Call come. I'll get it, definitely get it
- there can be no doubt about that.

It was in this mood that I recently left Sandip. But then I did
looked around me, where was it, the tree of abundance? Oh why
does the outside world mock and mock our hearts like that?

But I have to get it myself; how, that doesn't matter to me, because sin
does not exist here. Sin only taints the weak; me with my
Shakti power stand above her. Only a common man can steal
the king conquers and takes whatever booty comes his way ... I have to
find out where the treasury is, who is bringing the money there and who
it guards.

I spent half the night on the outside porch, looking for it
Row of commercial buildings across. But how should I get the 50,000 rupees
get out of the claws of those iron bars? When I get through
any spell all those guards would have fallen dead to the ground
I would not have hesitated - I was so merciless
Sense!

But while a whole band of robbers in the whirling brain of his Rani one
Performed war dance, the great house of the rajah was in the deepest peace
there. The guard's bell rang one hour after the other, and that one
Heaven looked down on me quietly and calmly.

Finally I called for Amulia.

"We need money for the national cause," I said to him. "Can
can't you make it out of the treasury? "

"Why not?" He said, throwing himself into his chest.

Oh, hadn't I just answered "Why not?" When
Sandip asked me? The poor guy's confidence only got me
give little hope.

"How do you want to start it?" I asked.

Let go of the adventurous plans he began to develop on it
repeat themselves only in a horror novel.

"No, Amulia," I said sternly, "you mustn't be childish."

"Well," he said, "I will bribe the guards."

"Where do you want to get the money from?"

"I can pillage the bazaar," he replied bluntly.

“Don't do things like that! I have my jewelry, which I come with
need. "

“But,” said Amulja, “it occurs to me that the treasurer is not
bribed. But that doesn't matter; there is another and
easier means. "

"Which one?"

“Why do you need to know? It's easy."

"But I would like to know."

Amulja rummaged in his jacket pocket and first pulled out a small issue
out the Gita, which he put on the table - and then a small one
Pistol that he showed me without saying anything more.

Terrible! He didn't think about it for a moment, our good old man
Kill Treasurer [32]! When you have your frank, open face
saw you would have thought he couldn't hurt a fly, but what
were those for words that came out of his mouth! It was clear that
Treasurer was for him nothing real and living that too
his feeling spoke, but only a void that was filled with
always prepare sayings from the Gita such as: “He who kills the body kills
Nothing!"

"But Amulja, what are you thinking?" I finally exclaimed. "You know
because not that the good old man has a wife and children and that he ... "

"Where should we find men who have no wives and children?"
he interrupted me. “You see, Maharani, what we call pity is im
Basically only pity for ourselves. We shy away from our own
to hurt softer impulses and feelings, and therefore we hit
not to! That is the height of cowardice! "

It struck me when I heard Sandips say this
Boy heard. He was still so touchingly young and immature - at that age
where one can still believe in the good as such, at the age where one can
truly lives and grows. The mother in me awoke.

For myself there was no longer good or bad - there was only death,
the beautiful alluring death. But when I was so calm about this boy
Murder of a harmless old man heard talking about a whole
just cause, I shivered. The more clearly I saw that
There was no sin in his heart, the more terrible it seemed to me
Sin in his words. It seemed to me as if the sin of the fathers was in the
would haunt innocent children.

The sight of his great ones, glowing with faith and enthusiasm
Eyes cut through my soul. He plunged into his delusion
straight into the maw of the dragon from which there was no return.
How could I save him? Why doesn't my country even turn out to be
real mother, who presses her son to her heart and exclaims: "O, mine
Child, my child, what use is it that you save me if I don't have you?
can save? "

I know well that all power on earth becomes great when it is with
allied to Satan. But the mother is there for her, even if she is too
standing all alone, defying the devil and trying to hinder his work. The
Mother doesn't care for mere success, however great it may be - she
wants to give life and keep life. And my soul stretches in
hands out today with fervent desire to save this child.

I have just incited him to robbery. What I now also object to
like to say, he takes it as a feminine weakness. They love our weakness
only if it lures the world into its nets!

“You don't have to do anything, Amulja, I'll get the money
I finally said to him.

When he was about to leave the door, I called him back.
“Amulia,” I said, “I am your older sister. According to the calendar
Today is not Brother's Day [33], but in truth all days are in
Year brother days. My blessings be with you! May God always keep you! "

These unexpected words from my lips made Amulja rigid
Surprise. He stood motionless for a while. Then he came to.
And now he prostrated himself before me as a sign that he was mine
Accepted sisterhood and showed me his awe as a brother. As
he got up, his eyes were full of tears ... Oh, my little one
Brothers! I hurry to death with quick steps, leave me all
take your sin with me! May your innocence never be tainted by me
become!

I said to him: "Give me this pistol as a present from my brother!"

"What do you want with that, sister?"

"I want to familiarize myself with death."

“That's right, sister. Our women too must learn how to
and how to kill. ”And with that Amulia gave me the pistol.

It seemed to me as if the splendor of his youthful countenance was my life
outshone with the premonition of a new morning light. I put the
Gun to me. May this brotherly gift be the last refuge in mine
To be in need ...

Now that the door to the mother's chamber in my woman's heart once
was open, I believed it would always stay open. But this one
The path to salvation was blocked when the mistress took the place of the mother
and closed it again. The next day I saw Sandip, and
immediately madness danced openly and rampantly in my heart.

What was this Was this my truer me now? No never! Never before
I had known this shameless, cruel woman in me. The
Snake Charmers had come and pretended to be this
Snake conjured up from the folds of my robe - but she was
never there, she was hidden with him the whole time. Some demon has
Possessed me and what I am doing today is his game and
Drifting - it has nothing to do with me.

That demon was under the mask of a god with his that day
red torch came to me and said: “I am your country. I
am your lamp [34]. I am more to you than any of yours.
Gang Mataram! "And with my hands folded I answered:" You
are my religion. You are my sky. Everything else that is mine
shall be swept away by the flood of my love for you. band
Mataram! "

Is it five thousand? It should be five thousand! Tomorrow you need
you? You shall have it tomorrow! In this frenzied orgy this is supposed to be
Be a victim of 5000 like the foam on the mug, and then on to the
wild feast! Let the immovable world sway under our feet,
Fire shall flash from our eyes, a storm shall howl in our ears,
and the forms of reality and fantasy should
dance in the fog before our eyes. And then we want
tumbling staggering into the abyss of death - and in an instant
all the fire will be extinguished, the ashes scattered, and nothing will
left over.


Footnotes:

[32] The treasurer is the civil servant who is most involved with the
female manor comes into contact as he does their jobs for
takes care of the household and does her shopping, and so he belongs
more to family than the others.

[33] In Bengali houses (perhaps in Hindu houses
everywhere in India) becomes the daughter of the house with special love
cherished because, according to custom, she is married so early. So
she takes dear memories with her to her husband's home, where she works as a
Strangers first have to take root before they get the position they deserve
is granted. The feeling that the young woman has in her old home
preserved opposite, arrives for solemn expression on the Brother's Day
whom the brothers are invited to their married sister's house.
If the sister is the older one, she takes the reverence from her
Brothers meet and give them their blessings, and vice versa. In the
Occasional gifts are exchanged, which are seen as gifts of awe
or of blessing. (Note from the English translation)

[34] In English: I am your Sandip. The Indian word sandipu
meaning "flaming, shining". (Transl.)




CHAPTER NINTH


BIMALA'S STORY

XV

For a while I pondered in vain how I got the money
should get, until the other day suddenly I got extremely excited in front of mine
Imagination the way stood there as a clear picture.

Every year, around the time of the festival of the goddess Kali, my husband does
An honorary gift of 6,000 rupees to my sister-in-law, and it always will be
deposited in her account at the bank in Calcutta. This year
she received this gift of honor as usual, but the money is not yet
taken to the bank and kept in an iron safe for the time being
kept in a corner of the little dressing room next to ours
Bedroom.

Every year my husband puts the money in the bank himself. This time has
he has not yet had a chance to drive into town. I had to
do not see in it the hand of providence? The money is here
held back because the fatherland needs it - who would have that
Power to take it from him and put it in the bank? And how could
I refuse to take it away The goddess of destruction holds me
takes her blood cup and calls: "Give me a drink, I'm thirsty."
I want to give her my own heart and soul with those 5000 rupees. Size
Mother! He who loses the money will hardly feel the loss, but
you will destroy me completely!

How many times I used to have my sister-in-law a thief inside
called because she flattered my innocent husband's money. After this
After the death of her husband, she often kept things that belonged to us for herself
the page. I used to point this out to my husband, but
he did not say anything. I often got angry and said, "If you feel like it
give, if you like, give as much as you want, but why are you letting go
steal from you? ”Providence smiled at my complaints
because today it is me who own what belongs to my sister-in-law
steals my husband's safe.

My husband is in the habit of leaving the keys in his pocket
when he undresses and his in the dressing room before going to bed
Leaves stuff there. I found the key to the safe and
opened it. It was as if the faint sound made the whole world
would have to wake up! Suddenly my hands and feet went freezing cold, and so did I.
trembled all over.

There's a drawer in the safe. When I opened it, I found
the money, not in banknotes but in wrapped gold rolls. I
didn't have time to count what I needed. There were
twenty roles. I took them all and tied them in a corner of mine
Sari.

What a weight that was! It was as if the burden of stealing me
to the ground and put my heart in the dust. Maybe would have
Banknotes made it seem less like theft to me, but this was it
all gold.

After sneaking back like a thief, mine appeared to me
Room no longer like my own. All the precious rights that I have
had on it, disappeared before my theft. I started quietly for
to mumble as if muttering spells: "Gang Mataram,
Bande Mataram, my land, my golden land, all this gold is for you,
for no one else! "

But at night the mind is weak. I went with closed
Eyes back through the bedroom where my husband slept and stepped
out onto the open terrace in front of it; there I threw myself stretched out
on the floor, the corner of my sari with the gold against my chest
pressed. I felt every single roll of gold and it was like every one
gave my heart a painful thrust.

The night stood in silence with its forefinger raised. I could mine
Do not perceive the house as something separate from my homeland: me
had robbed my house, so I had also robbed my country.
Because of this sin, my house ceased to be mine, including my country
was alienated from me. I would have died by looking for my country
went to beg, even without success, that would be one of the gods
been a welcome sacrifice. But theft is never worship,
how can I sacrifice this gold? Oh woe to me! I am that myself
Doomed to perdition, I must now also sin my country through mine
Stain touch?

The way to get the money back is cut off for me. I did not
the strength to go back into the room, to lock the key again
take to open the safe again - I would on the
The threshold before my husband's door collapsed passed out. One and only
The way that remains for me is the way straight ahead. But I also have
not the strength to carefully sit down and close the coins
counting. May they stay in their shell, I can't calculate now.

The winter sky was very clear. The stars shone brightly. If I, so
I thought to myself as I lay out there, all these stars, one
after the other, how golden coins for my fatherland would have to steal,
these stars that the darkness so carefully in their bosom
kept, - then heaven would forever be his sight
robbed and orphaned the night forever, and my theft would be
rob the whole world. But wasn't exactly what I did
had a robbery of the whole world - not just a robbery of money,
but also of trust and honesty?

I spent the night lying on the terrace. When finally the
Tomorrow came and I was sure that my husband got up and not
was more in his room because I finally dared to put the scarf over my head
drawn to go back to my bedroom.

My sister-in-law was watering her plants. When she got me from
Seeing her veranda pass by, she called, “You got the news
heard, Tschota Rani? "

I stopped, paralyzed with horror. It seemed to me as if the gold rolls
swell up under the scarf. I was afraid they would burst
and raining down on the ground as freezing rain and so in front of everyone
Servants expose the thief who killed herself by
stole their own wealth.

“Your band of robbers,” she continued, “has an anonymous letter
in which she threatens to plunder the treasury. "

I stayed silent like a thief.

“I have just advised Brother Nikhil to seek your protection
make an effort, ”she went on mockingly. "Call your henchmen back,
Robber queen! We want to make sacrifices to your gang Mataram if you
just save us. Is that a world today! But for God's sake spare it
for the sake of at least our house with robbery! "

I hurried to my room without answering. I had my foot on
Set drift sand and could not pull it back now. If i am
struggled to get out, I would only sink deeper.

If only the time came when I would give Sandip the money
could! I couldn't take it any longer, crushing its weight
me.

It was early on when I heard that Sandip was expecting me.
Today I did not think of adorning myself. The way I was in
Wrapped in my scarf, I hurried to the outer rooms.

When I walked into the living room, I found Sandip and Amulja together.
It was as if all of my dignity, all of my honor, were from head to toe
whizzed through my body and disappeared into the ground. I should
now before the eyes of this boy the utter shame of a woman
lay bare! Was it possible that the two had met here to?
to talk about my act? Wasn't there a scrap of a veil
stayed to cover up my shame?

We women will never understand men. If they find a way to
want to pave the way for their goal, it doesn't matter to them, the heart of the world in
To break pieces in order to pave her street with it, so that her
Victory car rolls more easily. If you of your creative urge
intoxicated, they lustfully destroy what the Creator created.
Diese Schande, die mir das Herz bricht, würdigen sie nicht einmal eines
Blickes. Sie haben kein Gefühl für das Leben um sie her; ihr ganzes
Verlangen geht auf ihr Ziel. Was bin ich ihnen anders als eine
Wiesenblume auf dem Wege eines seine Ufer überflutenden Stromes?

Und welchen Nutzen wird meine Selbstvernichtung Sandip bringen? Nur 5000
Rupien? War ich denn nicht noch etwas mehr wert als 5000 Rupien? Ja,
freilich! Hatte ich das nicht von Sandip selbst gelernt, und konnte ich
nicht im Licht dieser Erkenntnis meine ganze übrige Welt verachten? Ich
war die Spenderin von Licht, von Leben, von Schakti-Kraft, von
Unsterblichkeit -- in diesem Glauben, in dieser Freude hatte ich alle
meine Schranken durchbrochen und war hinausgeeilt. Hätte irgend jemand
mir nun diesen Glauben bestätigt, mein Tod wäre Leben für mich gewesen.
Ich hätte nichts verloren, obgleich ich alles von mir geworfen hatte.

Soll ich jetzt glauben, daß dies alles Lüge war? Mußte die Lobeshymne,
die sie mir so begeistert sangen, mich aus meinem Himmel herabrufen,
nicht damit ich die Erde zum Himmel machte, sondern daß ich den Himmel
selbst in den Staub herabzöge?


XVI

»Das Geld, Königin?« fragte Sandip, mich gespannt ansehend.

Auch Amulja sah mich erwartungsvoll an. Der liebe Junge! Wenn er auch
nicht mein leiblicher Bruder ist, so liebe ich ihn doch wie einen
jüngern Bruder. Mit seinem ehrlichen Gesicht, seinem hellen Blick, mit
seiner ganzen unschuldigen Jugend sah er mich an. Und ich, eine Frau --
vom Geschlecht seiner Mutter -- wie konnte ich ihm Gift reichen, nur
weil er danach verlangte?

»Das Geld, Königin!« Sandips freche Forderung klang mir in den Ohren. In
meinem Gefühl von Scham und Zorn hätte ich ihm das Geld an den Kopf
werfen mögen. Ich konnte kaum den Knoten meines Sari auflösen, so
zitterten meine Finger. Endlich fielen die Geldrollen auf den Tisch.

Sandips Gesicht wurde finster... Er mußte glauben, es seien
Silberrollen... Welche Verachtung war in seinem Blick! Welcher Ekel vor
meiner Unfähigkeit! Es war fast, als hätte er mich schlagen mögen! Er
muß geglaubt haben, ich sei gekommen, um mit ihm zu unterhandeln, ihm
als Abschlagssumme für seine Forderung von 5000 Rupien ein paar hundert
zu bieten. Einen Augenblick glaubte ich, er würde die Geldrollen
ergreifen und aus dem Fenster werfen und mir erklären, er sei kein
Bettler, sondern ein König, der seinen Tribut fordert.

»Ist das alles?« fragte Amulja mit einer Stimme, so voll überquellenden
Mitleids, daß ich hätte laut aufschluchzen mögen. Ich preßte mein Herz
gewaltsam zusammen und nickte nur stumm mit dem Kopf.

Sandip war sprachlos. Er rührte weder die Rollen an, noch äußerte er
einen Laut.

Meine Demütigung schnitt dem Knaben ins Herz. Mit erheuchelter
Begeisterung rief er plötzlich aus: »Das ist eine ganze Menge. Damit
haben wir reichlich genug. Sie haben uns gerettet.« Und dabei riß er
eine der Rollen auf.

Die Goldstücke blitzten hervor. Und im selben Augenblick schwand auch
die dunkle Hülle von Sandips Gesicht. Er strahlte vor Entzücken.
Unfähig, den plötzlichen Umschlag seines Gefühls zu verbergen, sprang er
auf und eilte auf mich zu. Was er wollte, weiß ich nicht. Ich warf einen
hastigen Blick auf Amulja -- die Farbe war aus seinem Antlitz gewichen,
als hätte er einen Peitschenhieb bekommen. Dann stieß ich mit aller
Kraft Sandip zurück. Als er rückwärts taumelte, stieß er mit dem Kopf
gegen die Ecke des Marmortisches und fiel zu Boden. Dort lag er eine
Weile regungslos. Von der Anstrengung erschöpft, sank ich auf meinen
Stuhl zurück.

Amuljas Gesicht leuchtete freudig auf. Er wandte sich nicht einmal nach
Sandip um, sondern kam geradeswegs zu mir, berührte ehrfurchtsvoll meine
Füße und blieb dann vor mir auf dem Boden sitzen. Ach, mein kleiner
Bruder, mein Kind! Diese deine Ehrfurchtsbezeugung ist die letzte
Berührung des Himmels, die mir in meiner leer gewordenen Welt noch
zuteil wird! Ich konnte mich nicht länger halten, und meine Tränen
flossen heftig. Ich bedeckte die Augen mit dem Ende meines Sari, den ich
mit beiden Händen gegen das Gesicht preßte, und schluchzte und
schluchzte. Und immer, wenn meine Füße seine zarte Berührung spürten,
wodurch er mich zu trösten suchte, brachen meine Tränen von neuem
hervor.

Als ich mich nach einer Weile gefaßt hatte und aufblickte, sah ich
Sandip wieder am Tisch stehen und die Goldstücke in sein Taschentuch
knoten, als ob nichts geschehen wäre. Amulja erhob sich von seinem Platz
zu meinen Füßen; seine nassen Augen leuchteten.

Sandip sah mich ganz gelassen an und bemerkte: »Es sind sechstausend.«

»Wozu brauchen wir soviel, Sandip Babu?« rief Amulja.
»Dreitausendfünfhundert ist alles, was wir für unsre Arbeit nötig
haben.«

»Wir brauchen nicht nur Geld zu diesem einen Zweck«, erwiderte Sandip.
»Wir werden alles brauchen, was wir bekommen können.«

»Das mag sein«, sagte Amulja. »Aber für die Zukunft übernehme ich es,
Ihnen alles zu schaffen, was Sie brauchen. Von diesem geben Sie, bitte,
die übrigen zweitausendfünfhundert der Maharani zurück, Sandip Babu!«

Sandip sah mich fragend an.

»Nein, nein«, rief ich aus. »Ich rühre dies Geld nie wieder an. Machen
Sie damit, was Sie wollen!«

Sandip sah Amulja an. »Kann der Mann je geben, wie die Frau geben kann?«
sagte er.

»Sie sind Göttinnen!« stimmte Amulja begeistert zu.

»Wir Männer können höchstens das geben, was wir durch unsre Kraft
erringen«, fuhr Sandip fort. »Aber die Frauen geben sich selbst. Aus
ihrem eignen Leib gebären sie, mit ihrem eignen Leib nähren sie. Solche
Gaben sind die einzig wahren Gaben.« Dann wandte er sich zu mir.
»Königin,« sagte er, »wenn das, was Sie uns gegeben haben, nur Geld
wäre, so hätte ich es nicht angerührt. Aber Sie haben uns das gegeben,
was Ihnen mehr bedeutet als das Leben selbst.«

Es müssen zwei verschiedene Wesen im Menschen sein. Das eine in mir
sieht ein, daß Sandip versucht, mich zu täuschen; das andre will sich
gern täuschen lassen. Sandip hat Kraft, aber keine sittliche Stärke.
Dieselbe Gewalt, mit der er das Leben aufrüttelt, zerschmettert es auch
wieder. Seine Pfeile verfehlen nie ihr Ziel, wie die der Götter, aber
sie sind giftig wie die der bösen Geister.

Sandips Taschentuch war nicht groß genug, um all die Goldstücke zu
fassen. »Königin,« fragte er, »können Sie mir noch ein anderes geben?«

Als ich ihm meines gab, führte er es ehrfurchtsvoll an seine Stirn, und
dann kniete er plötzlich vor mir nieder. »Göttin!« rief er, »ich wollte
Ihnen meine Ehrfurcht bezeugen, als ich mich Ihnen nahte, aber Sie
stießen mich zurück und warfen mich in den Staub. Sei es denn, ich nehme
Ihre Zurückweisung als ein Diadem, womit ich meine Stirn schmücke.« Und
damit wies er auf die Stelle, wo er sich im Fallen verletzt hatte.

Hatte ich ihn denn falsch verstanden? War es möglich, daß seine
ausgestreckten Hände wirklich meine Füße berühren wollten? Aber es war
sicher, daß selbst Amulja auch die Leidenschaft gesehen hatte, die aus
seinen Augen, aus seinem Antlitz glühte. Doch Sandip ist solch ein
Meister in der Kunst, seinen Lobgesang in Musik zu setzen, daß meine
Vernunft schweigt; ich verliere die Kraft, die Wahrheit zu sehen; mein
Blick ist umnebelt wie der des Opiumessers. Und so gab er mir
schließlich den Schlag, den ich ihm erteilt hatte, viel empfindlicher
zurück, denn die Wunde an seiner Stirn machte mein Herz bluten. Als
Sandip sich wieder erhob, war es mir als hätte mein Diebstahl eine Würde
bekommen und als lächelte das Gold, das auf dem Tisch glänzte, alle
Furcht vor Schande, alle Gewissensbisse hinweg.

Wie ich war auch Amulja wiedergewonnen. Seine Liebe zu Sandip, die einen
Augenblick einen Stoß erlitten hatte, flammte von neuem auf. Und der
Altar seiner Seele füllte sich aufs neue mit Opfergaben für Sandip und
mich. Sein kindlicher Glaube leuchtete wie das reine Licht des
Morgensterns aus seinen Augen.

Und nun lohte auch die Flamme meiner Sünde wieder hell auf. Als Amulja
mir ins Antlitz sah, erhob er die gefalteten Hände zum Gruß und rief:
»Bande Mataram!« Ich kann nicht erwarten, daß mich immer solche
Verehrung umgibt, und doch ist sie das einzige Mittel, meine
Selbstachtung am Leben zu erhalten.

Ich kann mein Schlafzimmer nicht mehr betreten. Es ist mir, als ob die
Bettstelle abwehrend eine Hand gegen mich ausstreckte, als ob der
eiserne Geldschrank mich stirnrunzelnd anblickte. Ich möchte diesem
beständigen Vorwurf, der mich quält, entrinnen. Ich möchte immer wieder
zu Sandip laufen, um ihn mein Lob singen zu hören. Es ist ja nur dieser
eine kleine Altar da, der aus den alles überspülenden Fluten meiner
Schande hervorragt, daher möchte ich mich Tag und Nacht an ihn klammern;
denn, wohin ich sonst treten will, ist ringsum Leere.

Lob, Lob, ich brauche unaufhörliches Lob. Ich kann nicht leben, wenn
mein Becher einen einzigen Augenblick leer bleibt. Daher brauche ich
heute von allem auf der Welt Sandip, als den einzigen Wert meines
Lebens.


XVII

Es ist mir jetzt unmöglich, mich zu meinem Gatten zu setzen, wenn er zu
seinen Mahlzeiten hereinkommt. Und doch empfinde ich es als eine solche
Schande, ihn allein zu lassen, daß ich das auch nicht fertig bringe.
Daher setze ich mich so hin, daß wir einander nicht ins Gesicht sehen
können. So saß ich neulich, als die Bara Rani hereinkam und sich zu uns
setzte.

»Es ist alles ganz schön und gut, Bruder, wenn du über diese Drohbriefe
lachst«, sagte sie. »Aber mich beunruhigen sie doch sehr. Hast du das
Geld, das du mir gabst, auf die Bank nach Kalkutta geschickt?«

»Nein, ich habe noch keine Zeit gehabt, es zu besorgen«, erwiderte mein
Gatte.

»Du bist so sorglos, lieber Bruder, du solltest lieber vorsichtig
sein...«

»Aber es ist im Ankleidezimmer da drinnen, in dem eisernen Geldschrank«,
sagte mein Gatte mit einem beruhigenden Lächeln.

»Wenn sie aber da hineinkommen? Man kann nie wissen!«

»Wenn sie bis dahin kommen, so können sie ebenso gut dich auch
forttragen!«

»Hab' keine Angst, an meiner armen Person vergreift sich niemand. Der
wahre Anziehungspunkt ist in deinem Zimmer! Aber Scherz beiseite, du
solltest es nicht wagen, Geld so im Zimmer aufzubewahren.«

»In ein paar Tagen werden die Regierungseinkünfte nach Kalkutta
gebracht. Dann schicke ich das Geld unter demselben Schutz zur Bank.«

»Gut. Aber vergiß es nur nicht ganz, du bist so zerstreut.«

»Selbst wenn das Geld verloren ginge, solange es in meinem Zimmer ist,
würde der Verlust doch nicht dich treffen, Schwester Rani.«

»Nun machst du mich aber böse, Bruder, wenn du so redest. Als ob ich
mich nur beunruhigte, weil das Geld mir gehört! Wenn du dein Geld
verlierst, glaubst du, daß mir das gleichgültig ist? Wenn das Schicksal
mir auch alles genommen hat, so hat es mich doch nicht gefühllos
gemacht für den Wert des treuesten Bruders, den es seit Lakschmans[35]
Zeiten her gegeben hat.«

»Nun, Tschota Rani, bist du zu Stein geworden? Du hast noch kein Wort
gesagt. Weißt du, Bruder, unsre Tschota Rani glaubt, ich wolle dir nur
schmeicheln. Wenn es darauf ankäme, würde ich es schon tun, aber ich
weiß, daß es bei meinem lieben alten Bruder nicht nötig ist.«

So plauderte die Bara Rani weiter und vergaß dabei nicht, ihren Bruder
auf diesen oder jenen Leckerbissen unter den Gerichten, die serviert
wurden, aufmerksam zu machen. Mein Kopf war die ganze Zeit in einem
Wirbel. Die Krisis nahte schnell. Das Geld mußte irgendwie wieder an
seinen Platz gebracht werden. Und während ich mein Hirn zermarterte, was
geschehen könne und wie es geschehen könne, wurde mir das unaufhörliche
Schwatzen meiner Schwägerin immer unerträglicher.

Und was alles noch schlimmer machte, war, daß nichts dem scharfen Blick
meiner Schwägerin entgehen konnte. Immer wieder sah sie mich prüfend von
der Seite an. Was sie auf meinem Gesicht lesen konnte, weiß ich nicht,
aber es war mir, als ob alles nur zu deutlich darauf geschrieben stände.


Dann tat ich etwas ganz Tollkühnes. Ich zwang mich zu einem leichten,
belustigten Lachen und sagte: »Ich sehe schon, daß der ganze Verdacht
der Bara Rani auf mich geht -- ihre Furcht vor Dieben und Räubern ist
nur Verstellung.«

Die Bara Rani lächelte boshaft. »Du hast recht, Schwester. Der Diebstahl
einer Frau ist der verhängnisvollste von allen Diebstählen. Aber wie
kannst du meiner Wachsamkeit entgehen? Bin ich ein Mann, daß du mich
täuschen könntest?«

»Wenn du mich so fürchtest,« entgegnete ich, »so laß mich dir alles, was
ich besitze, als Sicherheitspfand zur Aufbewahrung geben. Wenn du dann
etwas durch mich verlierst, so kannst du dich schadlos halten.«

»Nun höre einmal die kleine Einfalt«, wandte sie sich lachend an meinen
Gatten. »Weiß sie denn nicht, daß es Verluste gibt, die sich nicht
ersetzen lassen, weder in dieser Welt noch in einer andern?«

Mein Gatte mischte sich nicht in unser Wortgeplänkel. Als er fertig
war, ging er nach den äußern Gemächern, denn jetzt hält er seine
Mittagsruhe nicht mehr in unserm Zimmer.

Alle meine wertvolleren Juwelen waren auf dem Schatzamt in der Obhut des
Schatzmeisters. Doch auch das, was ich bei mir hatte, mußte noch
dreißig- bis vierzigtausend Rupien wert sein. Ich nahm meinen
Schmuckkasten und brachte ihn der Bara Rani. »Ich lasse diese Juwelen
bei dir, Schwester«, sagte ich, ihr den geöffneten Kasten hinhaltend.
»Dann brauchst du dir keine Sorge zu machen.«

Die Bara Rani machte eine Bewegung, als wollte sie sagen, daß ich sie
zur Verzweiflung brächte. »Ich weiß gar nicht, was ich von dir denken
soll, Tschota Rani«, sagte sie. »Glaubst du denn im Ernst, ich habe
schlaflose Nächte aus Angst, daß du mich beraubst?«

»Was wäre Schlimmes dabei, wenn du mir mißtrautest? Kann denn irgend
jemand sagen, daß er irgend jemand in dieser Welt kenne?«

»Du willst mich beschämen, indem du mir Vertrauen schenkst? Nein, nein!
Ich habe schon genug mit meinen eignen Schmucksachen zu hüten, ohne auch
noch die deinen zu bewachen. Komm, sei vernünftig und nimm sie weg, es
schnüffeln soviel Dienstboten herum.«

Ich ging aus dem Zimmer meiner Schwägerin geradeswegs nach dem
Wohnzimmer draußen und ließ Amulja rufen. Mit ihm kam auch Sandip. Ich
war in großer Hast und sagte zu Sandip: »Entschuldigen Sie, aber ich muß
ein paar Worte mit Amulja reden. Möchten Sie...«

Sandip lächelte verägert. »Also ich gehöre nicht dazu, wenn Sie mit
Amulja sprechen? Wenn Sie sich vorgenommen haben, ihn mir abspenstig zu
machen, so muß ich mich wohl ohne weiteres darein ergeben, da ich dann
doch keine Macht habe, ihn zurückzuhalten.«

Ich antwortete nicht, sondern wartete schweigend, daß er ginge.

»Gut denn«, fuhr Sandip fort. »Haben Sie Ihr tête-à-tête mit Amulja!
Aber danach müssen Sie mir auch eins gewähren, sonst würde es eine
Zurücksetzung für mich bedeuten. Ich kann alles ertragen, nur keine
Zurücksetzung. Ich muß immer den Löwenanteil haben. Deswegen bin ich ja
fortwährend mit der Vorsehung im Streit. Auch von ihr kann ich mir keine
Zurücksetzung gefallen lassen.«

Mit einem vernichtenden Blick auf Amulja verließ Sandip das Zimmer.

»Amulja, mein lieber, guter kleiner Bruder, du mußt etwas für mich tun«,
sagte ich.

»Was Sie mir auch auferlegen, Schwester, dafür werde ich mein Leben
einsetzen.«

Ich zog den Schmuckkasten aus den Falten meines Schals hervor und
stellte ihn vor ihn hin. »Verkaufe oder verpfände dies,« sagte ich, »und
verschaffe mir 6000 Rupien, so schnell du nur kannst!«

»Nein, nein, Schwester Rani«, sagte Amulja, aufs tiefste betroffen.
»Behalten Sie diese Juwelen! Ich werde Ihnen auch so 6000 verschaffen.«

»O, sei nicht töricht«, rief ich ungeduldig. »Es ist keine Zeit für
irgendwelche Phantastereien. Nimm diesen Kasten, fahre mit dem Nachtzuge
nach Kalkutta und bringe mir das Geld bestimmt bis übermorgen!«

Amulja nahm ein Diamanthalsband aus dem Kasten, hielt es hoch gegen das
Licht und legte es finster brütend wieder zurück.

»Ich weiß,« sagte ich zu ihm, »daß du niemals den richtigen Preis für
diese Diamanten bekommen wirst, daher gebe ich dir Schmucksachen im
Werte von ungefähr 30000. Es macht nichts, wenn sie alle draufgehen,
aber ich muß unbedingt die sechstausend haben.«

»Wissen Sie, Schwester Rani,« sagte Amulja, »daß ich mit Sandip Babu
einen Streit hatte wegen der 6000 Rupien, die er von Ihnen angenommen
hat? Ich kann Ihnen nicht sagen, wie beschämend mir die Sache war. Aber
Sandip Babu behauptete, wir müßten selbst unser Schamgefühl dem
Vaterlande opfern. Das mag wohl sein. Aber hiermit ist es doch anders.
Ich fürchte mich nicht, für das Vaterland zu sterben, für das Vaterland
zu töten, -- soviel Schakti-Kraft ist mir verliehen. Aber ich kann die
Scham nicht überwinden, daß ich von Ihnen Geld genommen habe. Darin ist
Sandip mir voraus. Er hat keine Reue und Gewissensbisse. Er sagt, wir
müssen uns von der Idee freimachen, daß das Geld demjenigen gehöre, in
dessen Kasten es zufällig ist, -- wenn wir das nicht können, wo bleibt
da die Zauberkraft des Bande Mataram?«

Amulja geriet, während er so sprach, immer mehr in Begeisterung. Er wird
immer warm, wenn ich ihm zuhöre. »Die Gita lehrt uns,« fuhr er fort,
»daß niemand die Seele töten kann. Töten ist ein bloßes Wort. So ist es
auch mit dem Rauben von Geld. Wem gehört das Geld? Niemand hat es
erschaffen. Niemand kann es mit sich fortnehmen, wenn er aus diesem
Leben scheidet, denn es ist kein Teil seiner Seele. Heute gehört es mir,
morgen meinem Sohn, am nächsten Tage seinem Gläubiger. Da nun
tatsächlich das Geld niemandem gehört, warum sollte unsre Patrioten ein
Tadel treffen, wenn sie, anstatt es einem unwürdigen Sohne des
Vaterlandes zu lassen, selbst davon Gebrauch machen?«

Wenn ich Sandips Worte aus dem Munde dieses Knaben höre, zittere ich am
ganzen Leibe. Mögen Schlangenbändiger mit Schlangen spielen; wenn ihnen
ein Leid geschieht, so müssen sie darauf gefaßt sein. Aber diese Knaben
sind so unschuldig. Die ganze Welt sollte segnend ihre Arme über sie
breiten, um sie zu schützen. Sie spielen mit einer Schlange, deren Natur
sie nicht kennen, und wenn wir sehen, wie sie lächelnd und
vertrauensvoll ihre Hände ihren Giftzähnen nähern, so wird es uns klar,
wie furchtbar gefährlich die Schlange ist. Sandip hat ganz recht, wenn
er argwöhnt, daß ich, wenn ich selbst auch von seiner Hand den Tod
nehmen würde, ihm doch diesen Knaben entreißen und ihn retten werde.

»So wollen also die Patrioten das Geld für ihren eignen Gebrauch haben?«
fragte ich lächelnd.

»Gewiß wollen sie das!« sagte Amulja stolz. »Sind sie nicht unsre
Könige? Armut würde ihrer königlichen Macht Abbruch tun. Wissen Sie, daß
wir durchaus darauf halten, daß Sandip Babu erster Klasse reist? Er geht
königlichen Ehren nie aus dem Wege, aber er nimmt sie nicht um
seinetwillen an, sondern um unser aller Ehre willen. Die größte Waffe
derer, die die Welt beherrschen, sagt Sandip Babu, ist der Zauber ihres
äußern Prunkes. Das Gelübde der Armut würde nicht nur Kasteiung, es
würde Selbstmord für sie bedeuten.«

In diesem Augenblick trat Sandip geräuschlos ein. Ich warf hastig meinen
Schal über den Schmuckkasten.

»Ist das tête-à-tête noch nicht beendet?« fragte er in spöttischem Ton.

»Ja, wir sind ganz fertig«, sagte Amulja entschuldigend. »Es war nichts
Besonderes.«

»Nein, Amulja,« sagte ich, »wir sind noch nicht ganz fertig.«

»Dann muß Sandip wohl noch einmal abtreten?« sagte Sandip.

»Bitte.«

»Und was sein Wiederauftreten anbelangt...«

»Heute nicht. Ich habe keine Zeit.«

»Ach so!« sagte Sandip mit blitzenden Augen. »Keine Zeit zu vergeuden!
Nur für tête-à-têtes.«

Eifersucht! Wenn das starke Geschlecht Schwäche zeigt, so kann das
schwächere es sich nicht versagen, die Siegestrommel zu schlagen. Daher
wiederholte ich fest: »Ich habe wirklich keine Zeit.«

Sandip ging mit finsterm Gesicht hinaus. Amulja war ganz verstört.
»Schwester Rani«, sagte er in bittendem Ton, »Sandip Babu ist böse.«

»Er hat weder Ursache noch Recht, böse zu sein«, sagte ich heftig. »Laß
mich dich vor einer Sache warnen. Du darfst Sandip Babu nichts von dem
Verkauf meiner Schmucksachen sagen, -- bei deinem Leben nicht!«

»Nein, ich werde es nicht tun.«

»Dann warte lieber nicht mehr! Du mußt noch heute mit dem Abendzug
fahren.«

Amulja und ich verließen zusammen das Zimmer. Als wir hinaustraten auf
die Veranda, stand Sandip da. Ich merkte, daß er Amulja auflauerte. Um
ihn zu hindern, mußte ich ihn mit Beschlag belegen.

»Was ist es, was Sie mir sagen wollten, Sandip Babu?« fragte ich.

»Ich habe nichts Besonderes zu sagen -- ich wollte nur etwas plaudern.
Und da Sie keine Zeit haben...«

»Einen kleinen Augenblick habe ich noch für Sie.«

Inzwischen war Amulja fortgegangen. Als wir eintraten, fragte Sandip:

»Was war das für ein Kasten, den Amulja mitnahm?«

Der Kasten war also seinen Augen nicht entgangen.

Ich blieb fest. »Wenn ich es Ihnen hätte sagen können, so hätte ich ihn
ihm in Ihrer Gegenwart übergeben.«

»Sie denken also, Amulja wird es mir nicht sagen?«

»Nein, das wird er nicht tun.«

Sandip konnte seinen Zorn nicht länger verbergen. »Sie glauben, Sie
werden die Oberhand über mich gewinnen?« fuhr er auf. »Das wird nie
geschehen. Dieser Amulja würde glücklich sterben, wenn ich mich
herabließe, ihn mit meinen Füßen zu zertreten. Solange ich lebe, werde
ich es nicht dulden, daß Sie ihn sich zu Füßen zwingen.«

O, über die Schwachen! Endlich ist es Sandip klar geworden, daß er
schwach ist mir gegenüber. Daher dieser plötzliche Zornesausbruch. Er
hat eingesehen, daß er gegen die Macht, die mir gegeben ist, mit seiner
bloßen Kraft nichts ausrichtet. Mit einem Blick kann ich seine stärksten
Befestigungen zertrümmern. Nun muß er schlechterdings seine Zuflucht zum
Poltern nehmen. Ich antwortete nur mit einem verächtlichen Lächeln.
Endlich bin ich über ihn hinausgewachsen. Ich darf diese überlegene
Stellung nicht verlieren, darf nicht wieder tiefer hinabsteigen. In all
meiner Erniedrigung muß mir dieser kleine Rest von Würde bleiben!

»Ich weiß,« sagte Sandip nach einer Pause, »daß es Ihr Schmuckkasten
war.«

»Sie können raten, was Sie wollen,« sagte ich, »von mir werden Sie
nichts erfahren.«

»So vertrauen Sie also Amulja mehr als mir? Wissen Sie denn nicht, daß
der Junge der Schatten meines Schattens, das Echo meines Echos ist? Daß
er nichts ist, wenn ich nicht an seiner Seite bin?«

»Wo er nicht Ihr Echo ist, ist er er selbst, Amulja. Und dieser Amulja
ist es, dem ich mehr traue als Ihrem Echo!«

»Sie dürfen nicht vergessen, daß Sie durch ein Versprechen gebunden
sind, all Ihren Schmuck für den Dienst der Göttin zu opfern. Dies Opfer
ist tatsächlich schon dargebracht.«

»Der Schmuck, den die Götter mir lassen, soll den Göttern geopfert
werden. Aber wie kann ich den den Göttern opfern, der mir gestohlen
ist?«

»Nun hören Sie, es nützt Ihnen nichts, daß Sie versuchen, mir auf diese
Weise zu entkommen. Jetzt bedarf es rücksichtsloser Arbeit. Wenn diese
Arbeit getan ist, können Sie nach Herzenslust Ihre weiblichen Listen
üben, und ich will Ihnen bei dieser Kurzweil helfen.«

Von dem Augenblick an, wo ich meinem Gatten das Geld gestohlen und es
Sandip gegeben hatte, war die Musik zwischen uns verstummt. Dadurch, daß
ich mich weggeworfen hatte, hatte ich nicht nur all meinen eignen Wert
zerstört, sondern auch Sandips Macht hatte ihren vollen Spielraum
eingebüßt. Man kann seine Schützenkunst nicht an einem Gegenstand üben,
der in greifbarer Nähe ist. Und so hat Sandip sein heroisches Aussehen
verloren. Seine Rede hat einen Ton von kleinlicher Streitsucht bekommen.

Sandip richtete seine glänzenden Augen voll auf mein Gesicht, bis sie
wie der durstige Mittagshimmel glühten. Ein paarmal machte er eine
Bewegung, als ob er aufspringen und sich auf mich stürzen wollte. Ein
Schwindel ergriff mich, meine Pulse stockten, es sauste mir in den
Ohren, ich fühlte, wenn ich jetzt dablieb, würde ich verloren sein.
Meine ganze Kraft zusammenraffend, riß ich mich vom Stuhl auf und eilte
zur Tür.

Aus Sandips trockner Kehle kam ein erstickter Ruf: »Wohin wollen Sie
fliehen, Königin?« Im nächsten Augenblick sprang er mit einem Satz auf,
um mich festzuhalten. Jedoch beim Laut von Schritten draußen vor der Tür
wich er schnell zurück und sank in seinen Stuhl. Ich stand vor dem
Bücherregal still und starrte die Titel an.

Als mein Gatte eintrat, rief Sandip aus: »Sag einmal, Nikhil, hast du
nicht Browning da unter deinen Büchern? Ich erzählte unsrer
Bienenkönigin eben von unserm Universitätsklub. Weißt du noch, wie wir
über die Übersetzung jener Verse von Browning stritten? Erinnerst du
dich nicht mehr daran?

    Warum blickte sie mich an,
    Wenn ich sie nicht lieben sollte?
    Gibt es nicht genug der Männer,
    -- Denn so nennen sie sich auch wohl --
    Die schon morgen kaum noch wissen,
    Wenn sie ihre ganze Seele
    Heute ihnen offenbarte!
    Doch daß ich aus anderm Stoffe,
    Wußte sie, als ihre Augen
    Über jene Schar hingleitend
    Plötzlich an mir haften blieben[36].

Ich brachte die Übersetzung ins Bengalische irgendwie zustande, aber das
Ergebnis war kaum ein bleibender Gewinn für die bengalische Literatur.
Ich habe einmal allen Ernstes geglaubt, ich sei auf dem Wege, ein
Dichter zu werden, aber die Vorsehung war gütig genug, mich vor solchem
Unheil zu bewahren. Erinnerst du dich an den alten Dakschina? Wenn er
nicht Salzinspektor geworden wäre, wäre er Dichter geworden. Ich weiß
noch heute, wie er... Nein, Bienenkönigin, es hat keinen Zweck, das
Regal zu durchstöbern. Nikhil hat seit seiner Heirat aufgehört, Gedichte
zu lesen, -- vielleicht hat er seitdem kein Bedürfnis mehr nach Poesie.
Aber ich glaube, ›das Fieber des Dichtens‹, wie es im Sanskrit heißt,
ist im Begriff, mich wieder anzufallen.«

»Ich bin gekommen, um dich zu warnen, Sandip«, sagte mein Gatte.

»Vor solchem Fieberanfall?«

Mein Gatte beachtete diesen Versuch zu scherzen nicht.

»Seit einiger Zeit«, fuhr er fort, »sind mohammedanische Priester am
Werk, die Muselmänner dieser Gegend aufzuwiegeln. Sie sind alle gegen
dich aufgebracht und können dich jeden Augenblick angreifen.«

»Kommst du, um mir zur Flucht zu raten?«

»Ich komme, um dir die Mitteilung zu machen, nicht, dir meinen Rat
anzubieten.«

»Wenn diese Besitzungen mir gehörten, so wären es die Priester, die
diese Warnung brauchten. Wenn du, statt zu versuchen, mich
einzuschüchtern, ihnen eine Probe deiner Energie gegeben hättest, das
wäre deiner und meiner würdiger gewesen. Weißt du, daß deine Schwäche
auch die Zemindars der Nachbarschaft ansteckt?«

»Ich habe dir meinen Rat nicht angeboten, Sandip. Ich wollte, du
behieltest deinen auch für dich. Er ist außerdem ganz überflüssig. Und
noch etwas anderes möchte ich dir sagen. Du und deine Anhänger haben im
geheimen meine Leute bedrückt und geplagt. Das kann ich nicht länger
dulden. Daher muß ich dich bitten, mein Gebiet zu verlassen.«

»Aus Furcht vor den Muselmännern, oder willst du mir noch eine andre
Furcht einjagen?«

»Es gibt eine Furcht, die nur die Feigen nicht kennen. Im Namen dieser
Furcht sage ich dir, Sandip, daß du fort mußt. In fünf Tagen werde ich
nach Kalkutta reisen. Ich möchte, daß du mich begleitest. Du kannst
natürlich in meinem Hause dort wohnen, dagegen habe ich nichts.«

»Gut, ich habe also noch fünf Tage Zeit. Inzwischen will ich Ihnen,
Bienenkönigin, deren Stock ich nun verlassen muß, mein Abschiedslied
summen. O, du Dichter des modernen Bengalen! Öffne mir deine Tore weit
und laß mich deine Verse plündern! Eigentlich bist du der Dieb, denn es
ist mein Lied, das du dir zu eigen gemacht hast, -- aber mag es
meinetwegen deinen Namen tragen, es gehört doch mir.« Damit stimmte er
mit seiner rauhen, etwas unsichern Baßstimme ein Lied nach der
Bhairavi-Weise an:

    Im Lenze deines Königtums, Geliebte,
    Da jagten sich Begegnen und Trennen in endlosem Spiel,
    Und Blumen erblühten auf der Spur der alten, die im Schatten welkten
        und starben.
    Im Lenze deines Königtums, Geliebte,
    Da erquoll jeder Begegnung mit dir ein Dankeslied.
    Doch hat nicht auch mein Abschied dir eine Gabe zu bieten?
    Ein zartes Hoffnungsblümchen, das ich heimlich im Schatten deines
        Blumengartens hegte:
    Mögen des Juliregens kühle Schauer
    Süß lindern deines Junis Glut!

Seine Kühnheit kennt keine Schranken, -- sie ist unverhüllt und nackt
wie das Feuer. Man kommt gar nicht dazu, ihr Halt zu gebieten,
ebensowenig wie man einen Donnerkeil aufhalten kann. Der Blitz flammt
plötzlich auf, allen Widerstand verspottend.

Ich verließ das Zimmer. Als ich über die Veranda nach den innern
Gemächern ging, stand Amulja plötzlich vor mir.

»Fürchten Sie nichts, Schwester Rani«, sagte er. »Ich reise heute abend
und werde nicht erfolglos zurückkehren.«

»Amulja,« sagte ich, ihm fest in sein von jugendlichem Eifer glühendes
Antlitz blickend, »ich fürchte nichts für mich, doch möge es nie dahin
kommen, daß ich nichts mehr für dich zu fürchten brauche.«

Amulja wandte sich, um fortzugehen, doch bevor er mir aus den Augen war,
rief ich ihn zurück und fragte: »Hast du eine Mutter, Amulja?«

»Ja.«

»Und eine Schwester?«

»Nein, ich bin das einzige Kind meiner Mutter. Mein Vater starb, als ich
noch ganz klein war.«

»Dann geh zurück zu deiner Mutter, Amulja!«

»Aber, Schwester Rani, jetzt habe ich beides, Mutter und Schwester.«

»So komm heute abend, bevor du abreisest, Amulja, und iß mit mir!«

»Dazu wird keine Zeit sein. Lassen Sie mich etwas Speise für unterwegs
mitnehmen, die Sie durch Ihre Berührung geweiht haben!«

»Was magst du besonders gern, Amulja?«

»Wenn ich bei meiner Mutter gewesen wäre, hätte sie mir eine Menge
Pousch-Kuchen gebacken. Backen Sie mir welche mit Ihren eignen Händen,
Schwester Rani!«


Fußnoten:

[35] Bruder von Rama, dem Helden des Ramajana, dessen Treue
gegen seinen Bruder und dessen Gattin Sita sprichwörtlich geworden ist.

[36] Die erste Strophe aus dem Gedicht Christina (Dramatic
Lyrics).




ZEHNTES KAPITEL


NIKHILS ERZÄHLUNG

XII

Ich hörte von meinem Lehrer, daß Sandip mit Harisch Kundu gemeinsame
Sache gemacht hätte und daß eine große Feier stattfinden sollte zu Ehren
der dämonenvernichtenden Göttin. Harisch Kundu erpreßte die Mittel dazu
von seinen Pächtern. Die gelehrten Brahmanen Kaviratna und Vidjavagisch
waren beauftragt, eine kunstvolle doppelsinnige Hymne zu verfassen.

Mein Lehrer hatte eben mit Sandip ein Wortgefecht darüber. »Auch bei den
Göttern gibt es eine Entwicklung«, sagte Sandip. »Der Enkel muß die
Götter, die sein Großvater schuf, nach seinem eignen Geschmack
ummodeln, sonst bleibt er ein Atheist. Meine Sendung ist es, die alten
Gottheiten der neuen Zeit anzupassen. Ich bin zum Erlöser der Götter
geboren, der sie von der Knechtschaft der Vergangenheit frei macht.«

Ich habe von unsrer Kindheit an gesehen, welch ein Ideengaukler Sandip
ist. Er hat kein Interesse daran, die Wahrheit zu entdecken, aber es
erfreut sein Herz, wenn er an ihr seinen Witz üben kann. Wenn er unter
den Wilden Afrikas geboren wäre, so hätte er eine schöne Zeit damit
zugebracht, ein Argument nach dem andern zu erfinden, um zu beweisen,
daß der Kannibalismus das beste Mittel ist, eine wahre Gemeinschaft
zwischen Mensch und Mensch herzustellen. Aber die, die sich mit Betrug
abgeben, betrügen schließlich sich selbst, und ich bin fest überzeugt,
daß Sandip, jedesmal, wenn er sich einen neuen Trugschluß ausgedacht
hat, sich einredet, er habe die Wahrheit gefunden, wie widerspruchsvoll
auch seine Schlüsse unter sich sein mögen.

Doch ich werde mich jedenfalls nicht dazu hergeben, die Fabrikation
solcher Rauschmittel in meinem Lande zu fördern. Die jungen Leute, die
bereit sind, sich in den Dienst ihres Vaterlandes zu stellen, dürfen
sich nicht an den Rausch gewöhnen. Wer andre durch Rauschmittel zur
Vollbringung eines Werkes treibt, sündigt an ihrer Seele.

Ich sah mich genötigt, Sandip in Bimalas Gegenwart zu sagen, daß er fort
müsse. Vielleicht werden beide mir falsche Beweggründe unterschieben.
Aber ich muß mich frei machen, auch von der Furcht mißverstanden zu
werden. Mag selbst Bimala mich mißverstehen...

Es kommen immer mehr mohammedanische Priester von Dacca herüber. Die
Muselmänner auf unserm Gebiet hatten mit der Zeit eine fast ebenso große
Abneigung gegen das Töten von Kühen bekommen wie die Hindus. Aber jetzt
tauchen hier und da Fälle auf, wo sie Kühe schlachten. Ich hörte zuerst
davon durch ein paar von meinen mohammedanischen Pächtern, die ihrem
Abscheu darüber Ausdruck gaben. Ich sah, daß wir hier in eine schwierige
Lage gerieten. Bisher waren ihre religiösen Gründe nur ein Vorwand, aber
dieser Vorwand wird zu wirklichem Fanatismus werden, sobald sie
Widerstand finden. Darin zeigt sich gerade der Scharfsinn dieser
Maßregel.

Ich ließ einige von meinen Hauptpächtern, die Hindus waren, rufen und
versuchte, ihnen die Sache im rechten Lichte darzustellen. »Wir können
selbst unerschütterlich an unsern Überzeugungen festhalten,« sagte ich,
»aber wir haben keine Macht über die Überzeugungen anderer. Wenn auch
viele unter uns der Wischnu-Religion angehören, so bringen doch die
Schakti-Gläubigen unter uns nichtsdestoweniger ihre Tieropfer dar.
Dagegen läßt sich nichts tun. Und ebenso müssen wir nun auch die
Mohammedaner gewähren lassen. Daher bitte ich euch, haltet euch von
allen Gewalttätigkeiten zurück!«

»Maharadscha,« erwiderten sie, »es ist so lange her, seit man von
solchem Frevel gehört hat.«

»Das kommt daher,« sagte ich, »weil sie sich aus eignem Antrieb dessen
enthielten. Laßt uns jetzt so verhalten, daß sie es von selbst wieder
tun. Aber wenn wir den Frieden brechen, bringen wir sie nicht dazu.«

»Nein, Maharadscha,« drängten sie, »jene guten alten Zeiten sind vorbei.
Dieser Frevel wird nicht aufhören, wenn Sie ihn nicht mit starker Hand
unterdrücken.«

»Unterdrückung«, erwiderte ich, »wird nicht nur das Küheschlachten nicht
verhindern können; sie kann dahin führen, daß auch Menschen
hingeschlachtet werden.«

Einer von ihnen hatte eine englische Schule besucht. Er hatte gelernt,
die Schlagworte des Tages nachzusprechen. »Es ist nicht nur eine Frage
der Strenggläubigkeit«, wandte er ein. »Unser Land ist im wesentlichen
ein ackerbautreibendes, und die Kühe sind...«

»Die Büffel in diesem Lande«, unterbrach ich ihn, »geben auch Milch und
werden zum Pflügen gebraucht. Und solange wir, ihre abgehauenen Köpfe
auf den Schultern und mit ihrem Blut befleckt, in unsern Tempeln rasende
Tänze aufführen, wird die Religion nur unserer spotten, wenn wir mit den
Mohammedanern in ihrem Namen streiten, und bei dem Streit um die
Wahrheit bleibt der Streit die einzige Wahrheit. Wenn nur die Kuh und
nicht der Büffel dem Schlachtmesser heilig sein soll, so ist dies
Buchstabendienst, aber nicht Religion.«

»Aber merken Sie denn nicht, Maharadscha, was die Ursache von allem
ist?« fuhr der englisch geschulte Pächter fort. »Dies ist alles nur
dadurch möglich geworden, daß der Mohammedaner sich sicher fühlt, selbst
wenn er das Gesetz bricht. Haben Sie nicht von dem Fall Patschurs
gehört?«

»Warum ist es möglich,« fragte ich, »die Mohammedaner so als Werkzeuge
gegen uns zu gebrauchen? Haben wir sie nicht durch unsere eigne
Unduldsamkeit dazu gemacht? Auf diese Weise straft uns jetzt die
Vorsehung, denn das Maß unsrer Sünde ist voll, und sie wird nun an uns
heimgesucht.«

»Nun gut, wenn dem so ist, so mag sie an uns heimgesucht werden. Aber
die Rache wird kommen. Wir sehen das untergraben, was die größte Stärke
unsrer Obrigkeit ausmachte, ihre Treue gegen ihre eignen Gesetze. Einst
waren sie wirkliche Könige, die des Rechtes walteten; jetzt werden sie
selbst Gesetzbrüchige und also nicht besser als Räuber. Die Geschichte
mag anders urteilen; aber unser Herz wird sie immer so richten...«

Die Verleumdungen gegen mich, die sich durch die Zeitungen verbreiten,
machen mich berüchtigt. Ich höre, daß man auf dem Verbrennungsplatz der
Tschakravartis unten am Fluß mein Bild mit aller Feierlichkeit und
großer Begeisterung verbrannt hat, und daß man andre Beschimpfungen
plant. Der Anlaß war, daß sie mich aufgefordert hatten, mich als
Aktionär bei der Gründung einer Baumwollspinnerei zu beteiligen. Ich
mußte ihnen sagen, daß ich nicht so sehr den Verlust meines eigenen
Geldes fürchtete, als mich mitschuldig zu machen am Verlust so vieler
armer Aktionäre.

»Sollen wir annehmen, Maharadscha,« sagten meine Besucher, »daß das
Wohl des Landes Ihnen gleichgültig ist?«

»Industrie kann das Wohl des Landes fördern,« versetzte ich, »aber der
bloße Wunsch, daß das Wohl des Landes gefördert werde, garantiert der
Industrie noch keinen Erfolg. Selbst als wir mit kühlem Kopf daran
gingen, wollte unsere Industrie nicht blühen. Haben wir irgend welchen
Grund, zu glauben, daß sie es jetzt tun würde, nur weil wir toll
geworden sind?«

»Warum sagen Sie nicht einfach, daß Sie Ihr Geld nicht wagen wollen?«

»Ich will mein Geld hineinstecken, wenn ich sehe, daß es Ihnen um die
Industrie selbst zu tun ist. Aber wenn Sie ein Feuer angezündet haben,
so ist damit noch nicht gesagt, daß Sie nun auch die Speise haben, die
damit gekocht werden soll.«


XIII

Was ist das? Unser Unterschatzamt in Tschakna ist geplündert! Eine
Geldsendung von 7500 Rupien sollte nach dem Hauptamt geschickt werden.
Der dortige Schatzmeister hatte die Barschaft beim Staatsschatzamt in
kleine Bankscheine eingewechselt, um sie bequemer tragen zu können, und
hielt sie in Paketen bereit. Mitten in der Nacht brach eine bewaffnete
Bande ins Zimmer ein und verwundete Kasim, den Wächter. Das merkwürdige
bei der Sache ist, daß sie nur 6000 Rupien genommen und das übrige auf
dem Boden ausgestreut haben, obgleich sie das ebenso leicht hätten
mitnehmen können. Jedenfalls ist der Beutezug der Banditen zu Ende, und
die Polizei beginnt ihren Beutezug. An Frieden ist jetzt nicht mehr zu
denken.

Als ich nach Hause kam, war die Nachricht mir schon vorausgeeilt. »Das
ist ja schrecklich, Bruder«, rief die Bara Rani. »Was sollen wir nur
tun?«

Ich nahm die Sache leicht, um sie zu beruhigen.

»Etwas ist uns geblieben«, sagte ich lächelnd. »Wir werden schon
irgendwie durchkommen.«

»Scherze nicht darüber, lieber Bruder. Warum sind sie alle so böse auf
dich? Kannst du ihnen denn nicht den Willen tun? Warum bringst du einen
jeden gegen dich auf?«

»Ich kann das Land nicht zugrunde gehen lassen, um sie zufrieden zu
stellen.«

»Wie entsetzlich war doch die Sache, die sie da auf dem
Verbrennungsplatz angestellt haben! Es ist eine Schande, daß man dich so
behandelt. Die Tschota Rani ist dank ihrer englischen Bildung über alle
Furcht erhaben, aber ich hatte nicht eher Ruhe, als bis ich nach dem
Priester geschickt hatte, daß er das Unheil abwendete. Tu's mir zuliebe
und reise nach Kalkutta, mein Liebling. Ich zittere, wenn ich denke, was
sie dir antun können, wenn du noch länger hier bleibst.«

Die aufrichtige Besorgtheit meiner Schwägerin rührte mich tief.

»Und Bruder,« fuhr sie fort, »habe ich dich nicht gewarnt, du solltest
lieber nicht soviel Geld in deinem Zimmer aufbewahren? Sie können jeden
Tag Wind davon bekommen. Es ist nicht wegen des Geldes -- aber wer
weiß...«

Um sie zu beruhigen, versprach ich, das Geld sofort nach dem Schatzamt
zu bringen und es dann mit der nächsten Gelegenheit nach Kalkutta zu
schicken. Wir gingen zusammen nach meinem Schlafzimmer. Die Tür zum
Ankleidezimmer war geschlossen. Als ich klopfte, rief Bimala drinnen:
»Ich ziehe mich an.«

»Nun, wie kommt es denn, daß die Tschota Rani sich so früh am Tage
anzieht?« rief meine Schwägerin. »Da ist wohl wieder eine ihrer Bande
Mataram-Versammlungen. Räuberkönigin,« rief sie Bimala scherzend zu,
»zählst du da drinnen deine Beute?«

»Ich sehe nachher nach dem Geld«, sagte ich und ging hinaus nach meinem
Geschäftszimmer.

Ich fand den Polizeiinspektor auf mich warten. »Haben Sie irgendeine
Spur von den Banditen?« fragte ich.

»Ich habe einen Verdacht.«

»Auf wen?«

»Auf Kasim, den Wächter.«

»Kasim? Aber wurde der nicht verwundet?«

»Nicht der Rede wert. Eine Fleischwunde am Bein, die er sich
wahrscheinlich selbst beigebracht hat.«

»Aber ich kann mich nicht entschließen, das von ihm zu glauben. Er ist
ein so treuer Diener.«

»Sie mögen ihn für treu gehalten haben, aber das hindert nicht, daß er
ein Dieb ist. Habe ich nicht erlebt, wie Menschen, denen man zwanzig
Jahre lang getraut hatte, plötzlich...«

»Selbst wenn es so wäre, so könnte ich ihn doch nicht ins Gefängnis
schicken. Aber warum sollte er den übrigen Teil des Geldes haben
umherliegen lassen?«

»Um den Verdacht von sich abzulenken. Was Sie auch sagen mögen,
Maharadscha, er ist ein alter Praktikus in solchen Schlichen. Er ist
zwar zu seiner Dienstzeit immer am Platz, aber ich bin sicher, daß er
bei allen Räubereien in der Nachbarschaft die Hand im Spiele hat.«

Und nun zählte mir der Inspektor die verschiedenen Methoden auf, wodurch
es möglich sei, an einem Raubanfall zwanzig bis dreißig Meilen weit fort
teilzunehmen und doch zur rechten Zeit wieder im Dienst zu sein.

»Haben Sie Kasim mitgebracht?« fragte ich.

»Nein,« war die Antwort, »er ist in Untersuchungshaft. Die Polizei ist
jetzt verpflichtet, die Untersuchung einzuleiten.«

»Ich möchte ihn sehen«, sagte ich.

Als ich in seine Zelle kam, fiel er mir weinend zu Füßen.

»Ich schwöre Ihnen bei Gott,« rief er, »daß ich es nicht getan habe.«

»Ich zweifle nicht an dir, Kasim«, beruhigte ich ihn. »Fürchte nichts.
Man kann dir nichts tun, wenn du unschuldig bist.«

Kasim war jedoch nicht imstande, einen zusammenhängenden Bericht von dem
Vorfall zu geben. Er übertrieb augenscheinlich. Vier- bis fünfhundert
Mann, große Gewehre, zahllose Schwerter spielten eine Rolle in seiner
Erzählung. Daran war entweder sein aufgeregter Zustand schuld, oder der
Wunsch, sich zu rechtfertigen, weil er sich so leicht hatte besiegen
lassen. Er behauptete, daß Harisch Kundu dahinterstecke; er war sogar
sicher, die Stimme Ekrams, seines Hauptpächters gehört zu haben.

»Nun höre einmal, Kasim,« mußte ich ihn warnen, »zieh du nicht mit
solchen Geschichten andere Leute in den Handel! Du hast nicht Harisch
Kundu oder irgend jemand anders anzuklagen.«


XIV

Als ich nach Hause ging, bat ich meinen Lehrer, mit zu mir
herüberzukommen. Er schüttelte ernst den Kopf. »Ich sehe nicht, wie
dies gut enden soll«, sagte er. »Die Leute ersticken ihr Gewissen und
setzen das Vaterland an seine Stelle. Alle Sünden des Landes werden
jetzt in ihrer ganzen nackten Häßlichkeit hervorbrechen.«

»Wer, meinen Sie, könnte...«

»Frage mich nicht! Aber die Sünde nimmt überhand. Schicke sie alle fort,
auf jeden Fall fort von hier!«

»Ich habe ihnen noch einen Tag gelassen. Sie werden übermorgen
fortgehen.«

»Und noch eins. Bringe Bimala nach Kalkutta! Sie bekommt hier ein zu
einseitiges Bild von der Welt draußen, sie kann die Menschen und Dinge
nicht in ihren richtigen Verhältnissen sehen. Zeige ihr die Welt -- die
Menschen und ihre Arbeit, -- gib ihr einen weiten Blick!«

»Das eben gedachte ich auch zu tun.«

»Nun, so schiebe es nicht auf! Ich sage dir, Nikhil, alle Rassen der
Welt müssen mit vereinten Kräften an der Geschichte der Menschheit
bauen, und solange sie noch ihr Gewissen um der Politik willen
verkaufen und ihr Vaterland zum Götzenbild machen, haben sie ihr Ziel
noch nicht erkannt. Ich weiß, daß Europa dies im Grunde nicht zugibt,
aber in diesem Punkte hat es kein Recht, unsern Lehrmeister zu spielen.
Die Menschen, die für die Wahrheit sterben, sind unsterblich; und wenn
ein ganzes Volk für die Wahrheit stirbt, so wird es auch in der
Geschichte der Menschheit Unsterblichkeit erringen. Möge hier in unserm
Indien unter dem Hohngelächter der Hölle das Gefühl für diese Wahrheit
lebendig werden! Welch furchtbare Sündenseuche ist aus fremden Ländern
in unser Land geschleppt...«

Der ganze Tag verging in der Unruhe, die die Untersuchung brachte. Ich
war ganz erschöpft, als ich mich abends zur Ruhe begab. Ich war noch
nicht dazugekommen, das Geld meiner Schwägerin nach dem Schatzamt zu
schicken, und verschob es bis zum nächsten Morgen.

Mitten in der Nacht wachte ich auf. Das Zimmer war dunkel. Ich glaubte,
irgendwo ein Stöhnen zu hören. Jemand mußte aufgeschrien haben.
Tränenschweres Schluchzen erklang wie Windstöße durch die Regennacht.
Mir war es, als ob der Schrei mitten aus meinem Zimmer gekommen wäre.
Doch ich war allein. Bimala hatte seit einigen Tagen ihr Bett in einem
andern Zimmer neben dem meinen. Ich stand auf, und als ich hinausging,
fand ich sie auf dem Balkon ausgestreckt mit dem Gesicht auf dem
nackten Boden.

Was ich jetzt erlebte, läßt sich nicht mit Worten sagen. Nur er weiß es,
der im Herzen der Welt sitzt und all ihr Weh in seinem eignen Herzen
fühlt. Der Himmel ist stumm, die Sterne schweigen, still liegt die Nacht
da, und inmitten von all diesem lautlosen Schweigen der eine
verzweifelte Schrei!

Wir geben solchem Leid Namen, gute oder schlechte, je nachdem wie es die
Wissenschaft einreiht, aber hat diese Todesangst, die aus einem
zerrissenen Herzen aufsteigt und sich in das bodenlose Dunkel ergießt,
überhaupt einen Namen? Als ich in jener Nacht unter dem schweigenden
Sternenhimmel auf jene Gestalt herabsah, erbebte meine Seele in heiliger
Scheu, und ich sagte zu mir selbst: »Wer bin ich, daß ich sie richten
sollte?« O Leben, o Tod, o Gott des ewigen Seins, ich beuge mein Haupt
in Schweigen dem Geheimnis, das in dir ist.

Einen Augenblick schwankte ich, ob ich umkehren sollte. Aber ich konnte
es nicht. Ich kniete neben Bimala nieder und legte meine Hand auf ihren
Kopf. Bei der ersten Berührung war es, als ob ihr ganzer Körper
erstarrte, aber im nächsten Augenblick löste sich die Starrheit, und die
Tränen brachen hervor. Ich strich sanft mit den Fingern über ihre Stirn.
Plötzlich tasteten ihre Hände nach meinen Füßen, sie zog sie zu sich
heran und preßte sie mit solcher Gewalt gegen ihre Brust, daß ich
dachte, ihr Herz würde brechen.


BIMALAS ERZÄHLUNG

XVIII

Amulja sollte heute morgen von Kalkutta zurückkehren. Ich hatte die
Dienstboten beauftragt, mich sofort zu benachrichtigen, wenn er ankäme,
aber ich hatte nirgends Ruhe. Endlich ging ich hinaus, um draußen im
Wohnzimmer auf ihn zu warten.

Als ich ihn ausschickte, um die Schmucksachen zu verkaufen, muß ich nur
an mich gedacht haben. Es kam mir gar nicht in den Sinn, daß ein so
junger Bursche, wenn er versuchte, solche wertvollen Juwelen zu
verkaufen, leicht in Verdacht geraten könnte. So hilflos sind wir
Frauen, daß wir, sobald Gefahr droht, die Last auf andre abschieben
müssen. Wenn wir ins Verderben geraten, so ziehen wir die, die uns
umgeben, mit hinab.

Ich hatte stolz gesagt, ich wolle Amulja retten, -- als ob ein
Ertrinkender andre retten könnte! Statt ihn zu retten, habe ich ihn in
sein Verhängnis geschickt. Mein lieber Bruder, eine solche Schwester bin
ich dir gewesen, daß der Tod an jenem Brudertag gelächelt haben muß, als
ich dir meinen Segen gab, -- ich, die unter der Last ihrer eigenen
Schuld zusammenbricht!

Ich fühle heute, daß der Mensch mitunter von dem Bösen wie von einer
Seuche befallen wird. Irgendein Keim fällt irgendwo hinein, und noch in
derselben Nacht naht mit großen Schritten der Tod.

Warum entfernt man solchen Kranken nicht von den übrigen Menschen? Ich
habe an mir selber erfahren, wie entsetzlich die Ansteckung ist, -- wie
eine glühende Fackel, die nach allen Seiten auszüngelt, um die Welt in
Flammen zu setzen.

Es schlug neun. Ich konnte den Gedanken nicht loswerden, daß Amulja in
Gefahr sei, daß er der Polizei in die Hände gefallen sei. Es herrscht
gewiß große Aufregung auf dem Polizeiamt: Wem gehören die Schmucksachen?
Wie hat er sie bekommen? Und schließlich werde ich öffentlich vor aller
Welt auf diese Fragen Antwort geben müssen.

Was für eine Antwort soll das sein? Endlich ist dein Tag gekommen, Bara
Rani, nachdem ich dich so lange verachtet habe. Dir wird deine Rache
werden, wenn das Publikum mich mit verächtlichen Blicken mustert. O
Gott, rette mich nur diesmal, und ich will all meinen Stolz meiner
Schwägerin zu Füßen werfen!

Ich konnte es nicht länger ertragen. Ich ging geradewegs zu der Bara
Rani. Sie war auf der Veranda und würzte ihre Betelblätter. Thako war
bei ihr.

Beim Anblick Thakos wich ich einen Augenblick zurück, aber dann bezwang
ich mich, neigte mich tief vor meiner älteren Schwägerin und berührte
ehrfurchtsvoll ihre Füße.

»Du meine Güte, Tschota Rani,« rief sie aus, »was kommt dir denn in den
Sinn? Warum plötzlich diese Ehrfurcht?«

»Es ist mein Geburtstag heute, Schwester«, sagte ich. »Ich habe dich oft
gekränkt. Gib mir heute deinen Segen, daß ich es nie wieder tun möge!
Mein Wille ist so schwach.« Ich neigte mich noch einmal und ging eilig
fort, aber sie rief mich zurück.

»Du hast mir nie gesagt, daß heute dein Geburtstag ist, liebe Tschotie!
Komm doch heute nachmittag zum Tee zu mir. Das mußt du auf jeden Fall
tun!«

O Gott, laß es heute wirklich meinen Geburtstag sein! Kann ich nicht
noch einmal geboren werden? Reinige mich, mein Gott, und läutre mich und
versuche es noch einmal mit mir!

Ich ging wieder ins Wohnzimmer, wo ich Sandip fand. Es war, als ob ein
Gefühl von Ekel mir das Blut vergiftete. Das Gesicht, das ich im
Morgenlicht vor mir sah, hatte nichts von dem Zauberglanz des Genius.

»Verlassen Sie das Zimmer!« stieß ich hervor.

Sandip lächelte. »Da Amulja nicht hier ist,« bemerkte er, »sollte ich
meinen, ich sei jetzt an der Reihe, ein tête-à-tête mit Ihnen zu haben.«

Jetzt rächte sich meine Schuld. Wie konnte ich ihm das Recht wieder
nehmen, das ich ihm selbst gegeben hatte? »Ich möchte allein sein«,
wiederholte ich.

»Königin,« sagte er, »die Gegenwart eines andern hindert nicht, daß Sie
allein sind. Verwechseln Sie mich nicht mit jedem Beliebigen! Ich,
Sandip, bin immer allein, selbst wenn ich von Tausenden umgeben bin.«

»Bitte, kommen Sie zu einer andern Zeit! Heute morgen...«

»Warten Sie auf Amulja?«

Ich wandte mich zornig ab und wollte aus dem Zimmer gehen, als Sandip
aus den Falten seines Mantels meinen Schmuckkasten hervorzog und ihn
heftig auf den Marmortisch setzte. Ich war aufs höchste bestürzt. »Ist
denn Amulja nicht fort?« rief ich aus.

»Fort, wohin?«

»Nach Kalkutta?«

»Nein«, frohlockte Sandip.

O, so hatte mein Segen doch gewirkt. Er war gerettet. Mag nun Gottes
Strafe mich, die Diebin, treffen, wenn nur Amulja gerettet ist!

Der Wechsel im Ausdruck meines Gesichts reizte Sandip. »So erfreut,
Königin?« fragte er höhnisch. »Sind diese Schmucksachen so kostbar? Wie
konnten Sie sich denn dazu entschließen, sie der Göttin zu opfern? Denn
Sie haben sie ihr tatsächlich geopfert. Wollten Sie ihre Gabe nun
zurücknehmen?«

Der Stolz stirbt schwer und erhebt noch bis zum letzten Augenblick immer
wieder seine Krallen. Ich fühlte, ich mußte Sandip zeigen, daß der
Verlust der Schmucksachen mir vollständig gleichgültig war. »Wenn sie
Ihre Begierde erregt haben,« sagte ich, »so können Sie sie nehmen.«

»Meine Begierde umfaßt heute den Reichtum ganz Bengalens«, erwiderte
Sandip. »Gibt es eine größere Kraft als die Begierde? Sie ist das Roß
der Großen dieser Erde, wie der Elefant Airavat das Roß Indras. Diese
Juwelen gehören also mir?«

Als Sandip den Kasten nahm und wieder unter seinen Mantel barg, stürzte
Amulja herein. Er hatte dunkle Ringe unter den Augen, seine Lippen waren
trocken, sein Haar wirr; es war, als ob die Blüte seiner Jugend in einem
einzigen Tage verwelkt sei. Sein Anblick schnitt mir durch die Seele.

»Meinen Kasten!« rief er und stürzte geradewegs auf Sandip zu, ohne mich
anzusehen. »Haben Sie den Schmuckkasten aus meinem Koffer genommen?«

»Deinen Schmuckkasten?« fragte Sandip spöttisch.

»Es war mein Koffer!«

Sandip lachte auf. »Deine Unterscheidung zwischen mein und dein wird
etwas schwach, Amulja«, rief er. »Doch ich sehe, du wirst trotzdem als
frommer Priester sterben.«

Amulja sank auf den Stuhl und barg das Gesicht in den Händen. Ich trat
zu ihm und legte meine Hand auf seinen Kopf. »Was fehlt dir, Amulja?«
fragte ich.

Er sprang auf. »O Schwester Rani,« rief er, »ich wollte Ihnen so gern
selbst die Juwelen zurückgeben. Das wußte Sandip Babu, und nun ist er
mir zuvorgekommen.«

»Was liegt mir an den Juwelen?« sagte ich. »Laß ihn sie nehmen! Das
macht nichts.«

»Nehmen?« fragte er ganz verständnislos.

»Die Juwelen sind mein«, sagte Sandip. »Es sind die Insignien, die meine
Königin mir verliehen hat.«

»Nein, nein, nein!« rief Amulja leidenschaftlich. »Niemals, Schwester
Rani! Ich habe sie Ihnen zurückgebracht. Sie dürfen sie niemandem anders
geben.«

»Ich nehme deine Gabe an, mein kleiner Bruder«, sagte ich. »Aber laß
den, der Verlangen danach hat, seine Begierde befriedigen!«

Amulja funkelte Sandip Babu an wie ein Raubtier und stieß heiser hervor:
»Hören Sie, Sandip Babu, Sie wissen, daß selbst der Galgen mich nicht
schreckt. Wenn Sie sich unterstehen, diesen Schmuckkasten
wegzunehmen...«

Sandip lachte gezwungen und sagte: »Du solltest mittlerweile wissen,
Amulja, daß ich nicht der Mann bin, der sich vor dir fürchtet.«

»Bienenkönigin,« fuhr er dann zu mir gewandt fort, »ich bin heute nicht
hierher gekommen, um Ihnen die Schmucksachen zu nehmen, sondern um sie
Ihnen zu geben. Sie hätten unrecht getan, wenn Sie meine Gabe aus
Amuljas Händen angenommen hätten. Um dies zu verhindern, mußte ich mich
erst ihres Besitzes versichern. Nun nehmen Sie hier diese meine Juwelen
als eine Gabe von mir. Da sind sie! Verschwören Sie sich mit diesem
Burschen, soviel Sie wollen! Ich muß fort. Sie haben alle diese Tage
Ihre besonderen Gespräche gehabt, von denen ich nichts wissen sollte.
Wenn jetzt besondere Ereignisse kommen sollten, so geben Sie mir nicht
die Schuld!«

»Amulja,« fuhr er fort, »ich habe deine Koffer und Sachen nach deiner
Wohnung bringen lassen. Ich will nichts mehr in meinem Zimmer haben, was
dir gehört.« Nach diesem letzten Pfeilschuß eilte Sandip hinaus und warf
die Tür hinter sich zu.


XIX

»Ich habe keine Ruhe gehabt, Amulja,« sagte ich, »seit ich dich
wegschickte, um die Schmucksachen zu verkaufen.«

»Warum, Schwester Rani?«

»Ich fürchtete, du könntest damit in Gefahr geraten, man könnte dich für
einen Dieb halten. Ich möchte lieber die 6000 Rupien gar nicht haben.
Jetzt mußt du noch etwas anderes mir zuliebe tun, du mußt gleich nach
Hause gehen zu deiner Mutter.«

Amulja zog ein kleines Päckchen hervor und sagte: »Aber Schwester, ich
habe die 6000.«

»Wo hast du sie her?«

»Ich versuchte alles mögliche, um Gold zu bekommen,« fuhr er fort, ohne
meine Frage zu beantworten, »aber es gelang mir nicht. So mußte ich das
Geld in Banknoten bringen.«

»Sag' mir aufrichtig, Amulja, schwöre mir, wo hast du das Geld her?«

»Das will ich Ihnen nicht sagen.«

Es wurde mir dunkel vor den Augen. »Was hast du Schreckliches getan?«
rief ich. »Ist es denn...«

»Ich weiß, Sie werden sagen, daß ich auf ungerechte Weise zu diesem
Gelde kam. Gut, ich gebe es zu. Aber ich habe den vollen Preis für meine
Schuld bezahlt. Daher ist das Geld jetzt mein.«

Ich wollte nicht mehr wissen. Das Blut erstarrte mir in den Adern.

»Schaffe es fort, Amulja«, flehte ich. »Bringe es wieder dahin, wo du es
hergenommen hast!«

»Das würde in der Tat schwer sein!«

»Es ist nicht schwer, lieber Bruder. Es war ein verhängnisvoller
Augenblick, als du mich zuerst sahst. Selbst Sandip hat dir nicht so
viel schaden können wie ich.«

Bei Sandips Namen fuhr er auf wie von einer Viper gestochen.

»Sandip!« rief er. »Durch Sie habe ich erst erkannt, was für ein Mensch
er ist. Wissen Sie, Schwester, daß er keinen Heller von dem Gold, das
er Ihnen abnahm, ausgegeben hat? Er schloß sich, nachdem er von Ihnen
gegangen war, in seinem Zimmer ein und weidete sich an dem Anblick
des Goldes, das er vor sich auf dem Fußboden ausbreitete. ›Dies ist
nicht Gold,‹ rief er aus, ›dies sind die Blütenblätter der göttlichen
Lotusblume der Macht; es sind Kristall gewordene Melodien aus den
Flöten, die im Paradiese des Reichtums erklingen! Ich kann es nicht
übers Herz bringen, sie zu wechseln, denn es ist, als sehnten sie sich,
die Erfüllung ihres Daseins zu finden als Schmuck um den Hals der
Schönheit. Amulja, mein Junge, blick' sie nicht mit deinem leiblichen
Auge an, sie sind das Lächeln Lakschmis, der bezaubernde Strahlenkranz
von Indras Gattin. Nein, nein, ich kann sie nicht dem Tölpel von
Verwalter überlassen. Ich bin sicher, Amulja, er hat uns belogen. Die
Polizei ist dem Manne, der das Boot versenkte, gar nicht auf der Spur.
Der Verwalter will nur etwas für sich dabei herausschlagen. Wir müssen
versuchen, die verhängnisvollen Briefe von ihm wiederzubekommen.‹«

»Ich fragte ihn, wie wir das anfangen sollten; er gebot mir, Drohungen
oder Gewalt anzuwenden. Ich war bereit, wenn er das Geld zurückgeben
wollte. Das könnten wir später erwägen war die Antwort. Ich will Ihnen
die Einzelheiten ersparen, Schwester, wie ich es endlich fertig brachte,
den Menschen so zu ängstigen, daß er die Briefe herausgab, die ich
verbrannte, es ist eine lange Geschichte. Am selben Abend noch kam ich
zu Sandip und sagte: ›Jetzt sind wir in Sicherheit. Geben Sie mir das
Gold, daß ich es morgen meiner Schwester, der Maharani zurückgebe!‹ Er
aber rief: ›Was ist das für eine Narrheit von dir? Du wirst bald vor dem
Sari deiner geliebten Schwester vom ganzen Vaterlande nichts mehr
sehen. Sag' Bande Mataram und banne den bösen Geist!‹«

»Sie kennen die Gewalt von Sandips Zauber, Schwester Rani. Das Gold
blieb in seinen Händen. Und ich verbrachte die lange dunkle Nacht auf
den Badestufen des Sees und murmelte: Bande Mataram.«

»Als Sie mir dann Ihre Juwelen zum Verkauf übergaben, ging ich noch
einmal zu Sandip. Ich konnte merken, daß er böse auf mich war. Aber er
versuchte, es nicht zu zeigen. ›Wenn du sie noch in irgendeinem Koffer
von mir aufbewahrt findest, magst du sie nehmen‹, sagte er und warf
mir die Schlüssel zu. Sie waren nirgends zu sehen. ›Sagen Sie mir, wo
sie sind‹, sagte ich. ›Ich werde es tun, wenn du von deiner Narrheit
geheilt bist, jetzt nicht‹, erwiderte er.«

»Als ich sah, daß er sich nicht bewegen ließ, mußte ich auf andre Mittel
sinnen. Ich versuchte das Gold gegen die 6000 Rupien in Banknoten von
ihm einzutauschen. ›Du sollst sie haben‹, sagte er und verschwand in
seinem Schlafzimmer, während ich draußen wartete. Dort erbrach er
meinen Koffer und ging durch eine andre Tür mit Ihrem Schmuckkasten
geradewegs zu Ihnen. Er wollte nicht, daß ich ihn Ihnen brächte, und nun
wagt er, ihn seine Gabe zu nennen. Wie kann ich sagen, wieviel er mir
geraubt hat! Niemals werde ich ihm verzeihen!«

»Aber eins ist gewiß, Schwester, die Macht, die er über mich hatte, ist
gänzlich gebrochen. Und Sie sind es, die sie gebrochen hat!«

»Lieber Bruder,« sagte ich, »wenn das wahr ist, so habe ich nicht
umsonst gelebt. Aber es bleibt noch mehr zu tun, Amulja. Es ist nicht
genug, daß der Zauber gebrochen ist. Seine häßlichen Spuren müssen
getilgt werden. Zögre nicht länger, geh' sogleich und bringe das Geld
dahin zurück, wo du es hergenommen hast! Kannst du es nicht tun, mein
Liebling?«

»Mit Ihrem Segen ist alles möglich, Schwester Rani!«

»Bedenke, daß es sich nicht um deine, sondern auch um meine Sühne
handelt. Ich bin eine Frau; die Außenwelt ist mir verschlossen, sonst
ginge ich selbst. Daß ich die Last meiner Sünde auf dich wälzen muß,
ist meine härteste Strafe.«

»Sagen Sie das nicht, Schwester! Der Weg, den ich ging, war nicht Ihr
Weg. Er lockte mich wegen seiner Gefahren und Schwierigkeiten. Jetzt, da
Ihr Weg mich ruft, mag er tausendmal schwieriger und gefährlicher sein,
Ihr Segen wird mir zum Ziel helfen. Es ist also Ihr Befehl, daß dies
Geld wieder an seinen Platz gebracht werde?«

»Nicht mein Befehl, mein Bruder, sondern ein Befehl von oben.«

»Davon weiß ich nichts. Für mich genügt es, wenn der Befehl von Ihren
Lippen kommt. Und, Schwester, ich hatte doch eine Einladung von Ihnen?
Um die darf ich nicht kommen. Sie müssen mir, bevor ich gehe, Ihr
prasad[37] geben. Dann werde ich, wenn es irgend möglich ist, noch vor
Abend meinen Auftrag erfüllen.«

Die Tränen traten mir in die Augen, als ich mit einem Versuch zu lächeln
sagte: »So sei es.«


Fußnoten:

[37] Speise, die durch die Berührung eines verehrten Menschen
geweiht ist.




ELFTES KAPITEL


BIMALAS ERZÄHLUNG

XX

Sobald Amulja hinaus war, sank mir der Mut. Auf welch gefährliches
Abenteuer hatte ich diesen einzigen Sohn seiner Mutter ausgesandt? O
Gott, warum mußte meine Sühne so weite Kreise ziehen! Konnte ich nicht
allein büßen, ohne daß so viel andere meine Strafe teilten? O, laß nicht
dies unschuldige Kind deinem Zorn zum Opfer fallen!

Ich rief ihn zurück, -- »Amulja!«

Meine Stimme klang so schwach, sie erreichte ihn nicht mehr.

Ich ging zur Tür und rief noch einmal: »Amulja!«

Er war fort.

»Wer ist da?«

»Ja, Maharani?«

»Geh' und sag' Amulja Babu, daß ich ihn zu sprechen wünsche!«

Was nun geschah, konnte ich nicht genau feststellen, -- vielleicht war
dem Manne Amuljas Name fremd, -- er kehrte unmittelbar darauf mit Sandip
zurück.

»Im selben Augenblick, als Sie mich fortschickten,« sagte er eintretend,
»hatte ich eine Ahnung, daß Sie mich zurückrufen würden. Die
Anziehungskraft desselben Mondes bewirkt beides, Ebbe und Flut. Ich war
so sicher, daß Sie mich würden rufen lassen, daß ich tatsächlich draußen
im Korridor wartete. Sobald ich Ihren Boten von Ihrem Zimmer her kommen
sah, sagte ich: ›Ja, ja, ich komme, ich komme sogleich!‹ bevor er nur
ein Wort äußern konnte. Das überraschte Gesicht dieses Hinterländers
hätten Sie sehen sollen! Er starrte mich mit offnem Munde an, als ob er
dächte, ich könne zaubern.«

»Alle Kämpfe in der Welt, Bienenkönigin,« fuhr Sandip in seiner Rede
fort, »sind in Wahrheit Kämpfe zwischen hypnotischen Kräften. Zauber
gegen Zauber geübt, -- geräuschlose Waffen, die auf unsichtbare Schilde
stoßen. In Ihnen habe ich endlich einen ebenbürtigen Gegner gefunden.
Ich weiß, Ihr Köcher ist gefüllt, Sie Meisterin im Streite! Sie sind die
Einzige in der Welt, die es fertig gebracht hat, Sandip fortzuschicken
und zurückzurufen, je nach Ihrem holden Willen. Nun liegt das Wild zu
Ihren Füßen. Was wollen Sie jetzt mit ihm tun? Wollen Sie ihm den
Gnadenstoß versetzen oder es in Ihrem Käfig gefangen halten? Doch ich
muß Sie vorher warnen, Königin, es wird Ihnen ebenso schwer werden, das
Tier auf der Stelle zu töten, wie es einzusperren. Jedenfalls sollten
Sie keine Zeit verlieren, Ihre Zauberwaffen zu gebrauchen.«

Sandip mußte die kommende Niederlage schon vorausspüren, und so
schwatzte er, um Zeit zu gewinnen, in einem fort, ohne eine Antwort
abzuwarten. Ich glaube, er wußte, daß ich den Boten nach Amulja
geschickt, dessen Namen der Mann sicher erwähnt hatte. Trotzdem brauchte
er absichtlich diesen Kunstgriff. Er wollte mir nicht Zeit lassen, ihm
zu sagen, daß ich Amulja und nicht ihn hätte sprechen wollen. Aber seine
Kriegslist war umsonst, denn sie zeigte nur seine Schwäche. Ich durfte
keinen Fußbreit von dem Boden weichen, den ich gewonnen hatte.

»Sandip Babu,« sagte ich, »ich bewundere, wie Sie so endlose Reden
halten können, ohne steckenzubleiben. Lernen Sie sie vorher auswendig?«

Ihm schoß das Blut ins Gesicht.

»Ich habe gehört,« fuhr ich fort, »daß unsre Redner von Beruf ein Buch
mit allen möglichen fertigen Reden haben, die sie sich dann für jede
beliebige Gelegenheit zurechtmachen können. Haben Sie auch solch Buch?«


Sandip knirschte seine Antwort zwischen den Zähnen hervor. »Die Natur
hat euch Frauen eine Menge Reize als Ausstattung mitgegeben, und darüber
hinaus habt ihr noch die Hilfe der Putzmacherin und des Juweliers; aber
glauben Sie nur nicht, daß wir Männer ganz ohne Waffen sind...«

»Sie täten besser, Ihr Buch noch einmal anzusehen, Sandip Babu. Sie
bringen alles durcheinander. Das kommt davon, wenn man die Dinge
auswendig lernt.«

»Sie!« stieß Sandip hervor, der nun alle Herrschaft über sich verlor.
»Haben Sie ein Recht, mich zu beschimpfen? Sie, die ich bis in die
kleinste Faser ihres Wesens kenne? Was...« Er konnte nicht
weitersprechen.

Sandip, dieser gewaltige Zauberer, ist vollständig hilflos, sobald sein
Zauber nicht wirken will. Von der Höhe seines stolzen Königtums war er
plötzlich auf die Stufe eines rohen Bauern gesunken. O, die Freude, ihn
so schwach zu sehen! Je beleidigender er in seiner Roheit wurde, je
stärker wallte diese Freude in mir auf. Seine Schlangenwindungen, mit
denen er mich umstrickte, versagen den Dienst, -- ich bin frei. Ich bin
gerettet, gerettet! Beleidige mich, beschimpfe mich, zeige dich in
deiner wahren Gestalt; nur verschone mich mit deinen falschen
Lobeshymnen!

In diesem Augenblick trat mein Gatte ein. Sandip hatte nicht die
Elastizität, sich wie sonst in einem Nu zusammenzuraffen. Mein Gatte sah
ihn eine Weile überrascht an. Wäre dies ein paar Tage früher gewesen, so
hätte ich mich geschämt. Aber nun war es mir gerade recht, was auch mein
Gatte denken mochte. Ich wollte meinem geschwächten Gegner den
entscheidenden Schlag versetzen.

Als mein Gatte uns beide in befangenem Schweigen verharren sah, zögerte
er erst ein wenig, dann setzte er sich. »Sandip,« sagte er, »ich suchte
dich und hörte, daß du hier seiest.«

»Allerdings bin ich hier«, sagte Sandip mit Nachdruck. »Die
Bienenkönigin ließ mich heute morgen rufen. Und ich, als ihr gehorsamer
Arbeiter im Stock, ließ alles liegen und folgte ihrem Ruf.«

»Ich fahre morgen nach Kalkutta. Du wirst mich begleiten.«

»Und warum, wenn ich fragen darf? Gehöre ich zu deinem Gefolge?«

»Nun gut, sagen wir, du reist nach Kalkutta und ich begleite dich.«

»Ich habe dort nichts zu tun.«

»Um so mehr Grund, daß du reisest. Du hast hier zuviel zu tun.«

»Ich werde mich nicht von der Stelle rühren.«

»So werde ich Gewalt brauchen.«

»Gut, so werde ich gehen. Aber die Welt besteht nicht nur aus Kalkutta
und deinen Besitzungen. Es gibt noch andere Orte auf der Landkarte.«

»Nach deinem bisherigen Verhalten hätte man kaum glauben sollen, daß es
außerhalb meiner Besitzungen noch einen Platz in der Welt gäbe.«

Sandip erhob sich. »Es kommt bisweilen vor,« sagte er, »daß ein einziger
Ort einem Menschen eine ganze Welt bedeutet. Mir bedeutete dieses
Zimmer die Welt, darum war ich hier wie festgewachsen.«

Dann wandte er sich nach mir hin. »Niemand als Sie, Bienenkönigin, wird
meine Worte verstehen, -- vielleicht nicht einmal Sie. Ich grüße Sie.
Mit Anbetung im Herzen verlasse ich Sie. Mein Losungswort ist ein andres
geworden, seit ich Sie gesehen. Es lautet nicht mehr Bande Mataram, Heil
dir, Mutter, sondern: Heil dir, Geliebte, Heil dir, Zauberin! Die Mutter
verleiht uns ihren Schutz, die Geliebte reißt uns zum Untergang, -- aber
dieser Untergang ist süß. Du rufst den Tod, Geliebte, und er naht mit
tanzenden Schritten, und mein Herz jauchzt beim Klirren seiner
Fußspangen. Du hast mir, deinem Diener, das Bild gewandelt, das ich von
unserm Bengalen hatte, -- ›dem Land der sanften Brise, des klaren
Wassers und der süßen Früchte‹[38]. Du hast kein Mitleid, meine
Geliebte. Du kommst zu mir mit deinem Giftbecher, und ich werde ihn bis
auf den letzten Tropfen leeren, um in Todesangst zu vergehen oder über
den Tod zu triumphieren.«

»Ja,« fuhr er fort. »Der Tag der Mutter ist vorbei. O Geliebte, meine
Geliebte, was gilt mir neben dir Wahrheit und Recht und selbst der
Himmel! Alle Pflichten sind zu Schatten geworden, alle Regeln und
Gesetze haben ihre Riegel gesprengt. O Geliebte, meine Geliebte, ich
könnte die ganze Welt in Flammen setzen bis auf das Stück Land, worauf
du deine kleinen Füße setztest, und dann in rasender Lust über die Asche
hintanzen... Ach, diese Menschen mit ihrer Sanftmut und Güte! Sie
möchten allen Gutes tun, -- als ob dies alles Wirklichkeit wäre! Nein,
nein! Es gibt keine Wirklichkeit in der Welt als diese meine Liebe. Ich
neige mich vor dir. Meine Hingebung an dich hat mich grausam gemacht,
meine glühende Verehrung für dich hat die Flamme der Zerstörung in mir
entzündet. Ich bin nicht gerecht. Ich habe keinen Glauben, ich glaube
nur an sie, die sich mir allein in der Welt offenbart hat.«

Wunderbar! Noch vor einem Augenblick hatte ich diesen Menschen aus
tiefstem Herzen verachtet. Aber was ich für tote Asche gehalten hatte,
erwachte jetzt wieder zu lebendiger Glut. Das Feuer in ihm war echt,
daran war kein Zweifel. Ach, warum hat Gott den Menschen so zwiespältig
geschaffen? Wollte er nur seine göttliche Kunst zeigen? Noch vor wenigen
Minuten hatte ich gedacht, daß Sandip, den ich einst für einen Helden
gehalten hatte, nur ein armseliger Theaterheld sei. Aber auch darin
hatte ich nicht recht. Denn selbst unter dem Flitterkram des Theaters
kann sich zuweilen ein wahrer Held verbergen.

Es ist sehr viel Roheit, Sinnlichkeit und Lüge in Sandip, und seine
Seele ist mit mancher Lage von irdischen Stoffen bedeckt. Dennoch müssen
wir zugeben, daß in seiner innersten Tiefe vieles verborgen ist, was wir
nicht verstehen und nicht verstehen können, -- wie ja auch vieles in uns
selbst uns ein Rätsel bleibt. Ein wunderbares Wesen ist doch der Mensch!
Welchem großen, geheimnisvollen Zweck er dient, das weiß nur der große
Furchtbare[39], während wir unter der Last stöhnen. Schiva wird das
Chaos lichten. Er ist eitel Freude. Er wird unsre Bande zerbrechen.

Ich fühle immer wieder, wie zwei Wesen in mir sind. Das eine weicht vor
Sandip zurück, wenn er mir wie das Chaos selbst entgegentritt, das andre
wird gerade dadurch unwiderstehlich angezogen. Das sinkende Schiff zieht
alle, die es umschwimmen, in die Tiefe. Sandip ist solch eine
vernichtende Kraft. Seine ungeheure Anziehungskraft ergreift uns, bevor
Furcht uns warnt, und in einem Augenblick werden wir widerstandslos
hinabgezogen, fort von allem Licht, von allem Guten, von Luft und
Freiheit, von allem, was uns lieb und teuer war, -- hinab in den Abgrund
der Vernichtung.

Sandip ist als Bote gekommen aus einem fernen Reiche des Unheils, und
wie er über das Land schreitet und unheilige Zaubersprüche murmelt,
scharen sich alle Knaben und Jünglinge um ihn. Die Mutter sitzt im
Lotusherzen des Landes und wehklagt laut, denn sie haben ihre
Vorratskammer erbrochen, um dort ihr trunkenes Gelage zu halten. Ihre
Weinernte für den Trank der Unsterblichen schütten sie in den Staub;
ihre altehrwürdigen Geräte zertrümmern sie. Wohl fühle ich ihr Leid,
doch zugleich werde auch ich von dem Rausch mit fortgerissen.

Die Wahrheit selbst hat uns diese Versuchung geschickt, um unsre Treue
gegen ihre Gebote zu prüfen. Die Trunkenheit verkleidet sich in
himmlisches Gewand und tanzt vor den Pilgern her. »Ihr Narren,« ruft
sie, »die ihr den unfruchtbaren Weg der Entsagung geht! Er ist lang und
die Zeit vergeht euch langsam, wenn ihr ihn wandelt. Daher hat mich der
Schleuderer des Donnerkeils zu euch geschickt. Seht her! Ich, die
Schönheit, die Leidenschaft, rufe euch zu mir, -- in meiner Umarmung
sollt ihr Erfüllung finden.«

Nach einer Pause wandte Sandip sich noch einmal an mich. »Göttin, die
Zeit ist gekommen, wo ich dich verlassen muß. Es ist gut so. Deine Nähe
hat ihre Wirkung getan. Wenn ich noch länger säumte, würde sie
allmählich wieder aufgehoben. Wir verlieren alles, wenn wir in unsrer
unersättlichen Begierde das gemein machen wollen, was das Höchste auf
Erden ist. Was ewig ist im Augenblick, wird schal, wenn wir es in der
Zeit ausbreiten. Wir waren im Begriff, unsern unendlichen Augenblick zu
verderben, als du deinen Donnerkeil erhobst, der ihm zu Hilfe kam. Du
selbst rettetest die Reinheit deines Gottesdienstes und damit zugleich
auch deinen Priester. Um deines Gottesdienstes willen scheide ich heute.
Ja, Göttin, auch ich gebe dich heute frei. Mein irdischer Tempel konnte
dich nicht mehr fassen; er drohte jeden Augenblick zu bersten. Ich
scheide heute, um in einem größern Tempel dein größeres Ebenbild
anzubeten. Erst wenn ich fern von dir bin, wirst du wahrhaft mein
werden. Hier empfing ich nur deine Gunst, dort wird mir deine Gnade
zuteil werden.«

Mein Schmuckkasten stand noch auf dem Tisch. Ich hob ihn auf und sagte:
»Bringen Sie diese Juwelen der Gottheit, der ich diene, und opfern Sie
sie ihr in meinem Namen!«

Mein Gatte verharrte in Schweigen. Sandip verließ das Zimmer.


XXI

Ich hatte eben angefangen, ein paar Kuchen für Amulja zu backen, als die
Bara Rani erschien. »O Himmel,« rief sie aus, »ist es dahin gekommen,
daß du dir die Kuchen zu deinem Geburtstag selbst backen mußt?«

»Könnte ich sie nicht für jemand anders backen?« fragte ich.

»Aber an solchen Tagen solltest du nicht andre festlich bewirten,
sondern wir dich. Ich wollte gerade etwas Leckeres für dich
zubereiten[40], als ich die schreckliche Nachricht hörte, die mich ganz
aus der Fassung gebracht. Eine Schar von fünf- bis sechshundert Banditen
sollen in eins unsrer Schatzhäuser eingebrochen sein und sich mit 6000
Rupien davongemacht haben. Man erwartet, daß sie demnächst unser Haus
plündern werden.«

Ich war in hohem Grade erleichtert. So war es also doch unser eignes
Geld. Ich hätte am liebsten gleich Amulja rufen lassen, um ihm zu sagen,
daß er die Banknoten nur meinem Gatten einzuhändigen brauchte und die
Erklärung mir überlassen könnte.

»Du bist wirklich ein wunderliches Geschöpf!« rief meine Schwägerin aus,
als sie den Wechsel im Ausdruck meines Gesichts sah. »Kennst du denn gar
nicht so etwas wie Furcht?«

»Ich glaube nicht daran«, sagte ich. »Warum sollten sie unser Haus
plündern?«

»Du glaubst nicht daran, wahrhaftig! Wer hätte denn geglaubt, daß sie
unser Schatzhaus angreifen würden?«

Ich gab keine Antwort, sondern beugte mich über meine Kuchen, die ich
mit geriebenen Kokosnüssen füllte.

»Nun, ich muß gehen«, sagte die Bara Rani, nachdem sie mich noch einmal
verwundert angestarrt hatte. »Ich muß mit Bruder Nikhil sprechen und
dafür sorgen, daß mein Geld nach Kalkutta geschickt wird, bevor es zu
spät ist.«

Kaum war sie fort, so überließ ich die Kuchen sich selbst und stürzte in
mein Ankleidezimmer, das ich von innen abschloß. Meines Gatten Kittel
mit den Schlüsseln in der Tasche hing noch da, -- so vergeßlich war er.
Ich nahm den Schlüssel zu dem eisernen Geldschrank von dem Ring und
steckte ihn zu mir.

Da klopfte es an die Tür. »Ich bin beim Anziehen«, rief ich. Ich hörte,
wie die Bara Rani sagte: »Noch vor einer Minute sah ich sie beim
Kuchenbacken, und jetzt ist sie mit ihrem Putz beschäftigt. Mich soll
wundern, was ihr danach einfällt! Gewiß haben sie wieder eine ihrer
Bande-Mataram-Versammlungen.« »Höre einmal, Räuberkönigin,« rief sie zu
mir herein, »bist du dabei, deine Beute zu zählen?«

Als sie fort waren, öffnete ich den eisernen Geldschrank. Ich weiß
nicht, was mich dazu veranlaßte, vielleicht hatte ich die geheime
Hoffnung, daß alles ein Traum gewesen sei. Wie, wenn ich beim Öffnen der
inneren Schublade die Geldrollen an ihrem Platze fände?... Ach, alles
war so leer wie das Vertrauen, das ich verraten hatte.

Ich mußte die Komödie des Umkleidens durchführen. So frisierte ich mich
denn ganz überflüssigerweise noch einmal und steckte mein Haar anders
hoch. Als ich herauskam, spottete meine Schwägerin: »Wie oft ziehst du
dich heute noch um?«

»Es ist ja mein Geburtstag«, sagte ich.

»Ach, dafür ist dir jeder Vorwand recht«, erwiderte sie. »Ich habe in
meinem Leben viele eitle Leute gekannt, aber du übertriffst sie alle.«

Ich wollte gerade einen Diener rufen, um Amulja holen zu lassen, als
einer der Leute mir ein kleines Billett brachte. Es war von Amulja.

»Schwester,« schrieb er, »Sie haben mich auf heute nachmittag
eingeladen, aber mir schien es doch besser, nicht zu warten. Lassen Sie
mich erst Ihren Auftrag ausführen und dann zu meinem prasad kommen! Es
kann etwas spät werden.«

Wo mochte er hingehen, um das Geld zurückzugeben? Welcher neuen Gefahr
lief der arme Junge in die Arme? Ach du elendes Weib, du kannst ihn nur
wie einen Pfeil absenden, aber nicht zurückrufen, wenn du dein Ziel
verfehlst.

Ich hätte sogleich bekennen sollen, daß ich die Triebfeder dieses
Raubüberfalls war. Aber wir Frauen leben von dem Vertrauen unsrer
Umgebung, -- es bedeutet uns die Welt. Wenn es einmal offenbar wird, daß
wir dies Vertrauen heimlich verraten haben, so haben wir den Platz in
unsrer Welt verloren. Wir müssen auf den Trümmern dessen stehen, was wir
zerbrochen haben, und seine scharfen Kanten verwunden uns bei jeder
Bewegung. Sündigen ist leicht, aber Wiedergutmachen ist schwer,
besonders für eine Frau.

Seit einiger Zeit ist jede ungezwungene Annäherung an meinen Gatten mir
abgeschnitten. Wie konnte ich ihn nun plötzlich mit dieser
ungeheuerlichen Nachricht überfallen! Er kam heute sehr spät zum Essen,
es war fast zwei Uhr. Er war zerstreut und rührte kaum einen Bissen an.
Ich fühlte, daß ich sogar das Recht verscherzt hatte, ihn zu nötigen,
noch etwas mehr zu nehmen, und ich mußte mein Gesicht abwenden, um meine
Tränen zu verbergen.

Ich hätte so gern zu ihm gesagt: »Komm doch in unser Zimmer und ruhe ein
Weilchen; du siehst so müde aus.« Gerade schickte ich mich dazu an, als
ein Diener eilig die Nachricht brachte, daß der Polizeiinspektor
Pantschu zum Palast heraufgebracht hätte. Das Antlitz meines Gatten
überschattete sich noch mehr, und er ging hinaus, ohne sein Mahl zu
beenden.

Bald darauf erschien die Bara Rani. »Warum gabst du mir nicht Nachricht,
als Bruder Nikhil hereinkam?« beklagte sie sich. »Da er so spät kam,
dachte ich, ich könnte inzwischen mein Bad nehmen. Wie wurde er nur so
schnell mit dem Essen fertig?«

»Wolltest du etwas von ihm?«

»Was bedeutet das, daß ihr morgen beide nach Kalkutta reisen wollt? Aber
das sage ich euch, ich bleibe nicht allein hier. Ich würde mich bei
jedem Laut tot ängstigen, jetzt, wo alle diese Banditen hier ihr Wesen
treiben. Ist es ganz bestimmt, daß ihr morgen reist?«

»Ja«, sagte ich, obgleich ich erst eben jetzt davon hörte und außerdem
gar nicht sicher war, ob nicht bis dahin Ereignisse eintreten würden,
die es ganz gleichgültig machten, ob wir reisten oder blieben. Wie
danach unser Heim und unser Leben sich gestalten würden, konnte ich mir
gar nicht vorstellen, alles erschien mir so nebelhaft und gespenstisch.

In ein paar Stunden mußte mein jetzt noch verborgenes Schicksal sichtbar
werden. War niemand da, der den Flug dieser Stunde aufhalten konnte, so
daß ich Zeit gewann, wieder gutzumachen, soweit es in meiner Macht lag?
Die Zeit, wo der böse Same im Boden liegt, ist lang, -- so lang, daß man
gar nicht mehr fürchtet, er könne aufgehen. Aber sobald er aus dem Boden
hervorsprießt, wächst er so schnell, daß gar keine Zeit bleibt, ihn
zuzudecken, selbst nicht mit dem eigenen Leben.

Ich will versuchen, nicht mehr daran zu denken, sondern in stummer
Passivität dasitzen, bis der Zusammenbruch kommt. Laß ihn kommen, in ein
paar Tagen wird alles vorüber sein -- Entdeckung, Spott, Mitleid,
Fragen, Erklärungen -- alles.

Aber ich kann das Gesicht Amuljas nicht vergessen, so schön und
strahlend in seiner Hingebung. Er wartete nicht verzweifelt den
vernichtenden Schlag des Schicksals ab, sondern stürzte sich mutig
mitten in die Gefahr. Auf ihn blicke ich voll Ehrfurcht in meinem Elend.
Er ist mein Erlöser. Er nahm wie im Spiel die Last meiner Sünde auf
seine Schultern. Er wollte mich retten indem er die Strafe, die mir
bestimmt war, auf sein Haupt rief. Aber wie soll ich diese furchtbare
Gnade meines Gottes ertragen?

O, mein Kind, mein Kind, ich neige mich vor dir. Mein kleiner Bruder,
ich neige mich vor dir. Du bist rein, du bist schön, ich neige mich vor
dir. Möchtest du in deiner nächsten Existenz als mein eigenes Kind in
meine Arme kommen, -- das ist mein Gebet.


XXII

Das Gerücht von dem Raubüberfall verbreitete sich nach allen Seiten. Die
Polizei ging beständig ein und aus. Unsre Dienstboten waren in großer
Aufregung.

Khema, mein Mädchen, kam und sagte: »Ach, Maharani, um des Himmels
willen, bewahren Sie mir doch meine goldene Halskette und Armringe in
Ihrem eisernen Geldschrank auf!« Wem sollte ich erklären, daß die Rani
selbst dieses ganze Netz von Verwirrung gewoben und sich nun auch darin
gefangen hatte? Ich mußte die Rolle der gütigen Beschützerin spielen und
Khemas Schmucksachen und Thakos Ersparnisse in meine Obhut nehmen. Sogar
die Milchfrau brachte einen Koffer in mein Zimmer, in dem ein Sari aus
Benares und andre ihrer ihr wertvollen Habseligkeiten waren. »Ich bekam
diese Sachen zu Ihrer Hochzeit«, erzählte sie mir.

Wenn man morgen meinen eisernen Geldschrank öffnet in Gegenwart dieser
Frauen -- Khema, Thako, die Milchfrau und all die andern ... Ich darf
nicht daran denken! Ich will lieber versuchen, mir vorzustellen, wie es
sein wird, wenn dieser dritte Magh[41] nach einem Jahre wiederkehrt.

Amulja schreibt, daß er erst spät am Abend kommen wird. Ich kann nicht
so untätig allein mit meinen Gedanken bleiben, ich will ihm noch ein
paar Kuchen backen. Ich habe schon eine ganze Menge gebacken, aber ich
muß noch damit fortfahren. Wer wird sie essen? Ich werde sie unter die
Dienstboten verteilen. Das muß ich noch heute abend tun. Heute abend
läuft meine Frist ab. Das Morgen steht nicht mehr in meiner Hand.

Ich fuhr unermüdlich fort, einen Kuchen nach dem andern zu backen.
Bisweilen kam es mir vor, als ob ich oben irgendwo in unsern Zimmern ein
Geräusch hörte. Konnte es sein, daß mein Gatte den Schlüssel zum
Geldschrank vermißt und die Bara Rani nun die Dienstboten
zusammengerufen hatte, um suchen zu helfen? Nein, ich wollte nicht mehr
hinhören; es war am besten, die Tür zu schließen.

Ich war eben im Begriff, es zu tun, als Thako keuchend hereingestürzt
kam: »Maharani, o Maharani!«

»Mach', daß du fortkommst!« fuhr ich sie an. »Laß mich in Ruh!«

»Die Bara Rani läßt Sie rufen,« sagte sie. »Ihr Neffe hat ihr ein so
wundervolles Instrument von Kalkutta mitgebracht. Es spricht wie ein
Mensch. Kommen Sie und hören Sie!«

Ich wußte nicht, ob ich lachen oder weinen sollte. So mußte jetzt von
allen Dingen auf der Welt ein Grammophon auf der Bildfläche erscheinen,
um bei jeder Drehung den näselnden Singsang seiner Arien zu wiederholen!
Welch fürchterliche Sache ist es doch um eine Maschine, die einen
Menschen nachäfft!

Die Schatten des Abends begannen zu sinken. Ich wußte, daß Amulja sich
sofort melden würde, wenn er zurückkäme, doch ich konnte nicht länger
warten. Ich rief einen Diener und sagte: »Geh und sag Amulja Babu, er
möchte sofort herkommen!« Der Mann kam nach einer Weile zurück mit dem
Bescheid, daß Amulja noch immer nicht zu Hause sei, er sei schon so
lange fort.

»Fort!« Dies letzte Wort tönte wie eine Klage durch das zunehmende
Dunkel an mein Ohr. Amulja fort! War er denn gekommen wie ein Strahl der
untergehenden Sonne, um auf immer zu verschwinden? Alle möglichen und
unmöglichen Gefahren schwirrten mir durch den Sinn. Ich war es, die ihn
in den Tod geschickt hatte. Wenn er ihm auch furchtlos entgegengegangen
war, das zeigte nur seine Seelengröße. Aber wie sollte ich hiernach noch
ohne ihn allein weiterleben?

Ich hatte kein Andenken von Amulja außer jener Pistole, seinem
Brudergeschenk. Sie erschien mir als ein Zeichen, das mir die Vorsehung
geschickt hatte. Diese Schuld, die mein Leben an seiner Wurzel vergiftet
hatte, -- mein Gott hatte mir in Gestalt eines Kindes das Mittel
gegeben, sie auszulöschen, und war dann entschwunden. O welche Fülle
erlösender Gnade lag in dieser Liebesgabe verborgen!

Ich öffnete meine Truhe, nahm die Pistole heraus und hob sie in
ehrfürchtiger Scheu an meine Stirn. In dem Augenblick erklangen die
Glocken vom Tempel unseres Hauses. Ich warf mich anbetend nieder.

Am Abend bewirtete ich das ganze Haus mit meinen Kuchen. »Du hast uns
einen wunderbaren Geburtstagsschmaus bereitet, und dazu noch ganz
allein!« rief meine Schwägerin aus. »Aber du mußt auch uns etwas zu tun
übrig lassen.« Und damit stellte sie ihr Grammophon an und ließ den
schrillen Sopran der Kalkuttaschen Sängerinnen durch das Haus tönen. Es
war, als hörte man einen Stall voll wiehernder Füllen.

Es wurde ziemlich spät, bis der Schmaus vorüber war. Ich hatte
plötzlich ein Verlangen, meine Geburtstagsfeier damit zu beenden, daß
ich die Füße meines Gatten ehrfurchtsvoll berührte. Ich ging hinauf ins
Schlafzimmer und fand ihn in tiefem Schlafe. Er hatte einen so
sorgenvollen, schweren Tag gehabt. Ich hob ganz, ganz sachte den Saum
des Mosquitonetzes und legte meinen Kopf neben seine Füße. Mein Haar
mußte ihn berührt haben, denn er bewegte im Schlaf die Füße und stieß
meinen Kopf weg.

Ich ging hinaus und setzte mich auf die Veranda an der Westseite. Ein
Wollbaum, der alle seine Blätter verloren hatte, stand in der Ferne da
wie ein Skelett. Hinter ihm sank die Mondsichel hinab. Plötzlich hatte
ich das Gefühl, daß selbst die Sterne des Himmels Furcht vor mir hätten,
daß die ganze Nachtwelt mich mißtrauisch anblickte. Warum? Weil ich
allein war.

Es gibt nichts Trostloseres in der Schöpfung als den Menschen, der
allein ist. Selbst der, dessen Angehörige alle einer nach dem andern
gestorben sind, ist nicht allein, Gesellschaft kommt ihm von jenseits
des Grabes. Doch der, dessen Angehörige noch leben, aber keine
Gemeinschaft mit ihm haben, der aus dem bunten Kreis eines vollen Heims
herausgefallen ist, dessen Dunkel blickt selbst das Sternenweltall mit
Schaudern an.

Wo ich bin, da bin ich nicht. Ich bin weit fort von denen, die um mich
sind. Ich lebe und bewege mich am Rande einer weltweiten Trennungskluft,
unsicher wie der Tautropfen auf dem Lotusblatt.

Warum verwandeln die Menschen sich nicht ganz, wenn sie sich verwandeln?
Wenn ich in mein Herz sehe, so finde ich noch alles da, was sonst da
war, -- nur ist alles auf den Kopf gestellt. Was schön geordnet war,
liegt wirr durcheinander. Die Perlen, die zu einem Halsband vereint
waren, rollen im Staub. Und so bricht mir das Herz.

Ich möchte sterben. Und doch wird in meinem Herzen alles fortleben, --
selbst im Tode kann ich nicht das Ende von allem sehen; der Tod bringt
nur noch größere Reuequalen. Was beendet werden soll, muß in diesem
Leben beendet werden, -- es gibt keinen andern Ausweg.

O vergib mir nur dies eine Mal noch, mein Gott! Alles, was du als
Reichtum meines Lebens in meine Hände legtest, habe ich mir zur Last
gemacht. Ich kann sie nicht länger tragen, noch sie abwerfen. O Herr,
laß noch einmal jene süßen Melodien auf deiner Flöte ertönen, die du
einst vor langer Zeit für mich spieltest, als du am rosigen Horizont
meines Morgenhimmels standest, -- und laß alle meine Verwirrungen
einfach und leicht sich lösen! Nur die Musik deiner Flöte kann heilen,
was zerbrochen, und reinigen, was beschmutzt ist. Schaffe mein Heim neu
mit deiner Musik! Ich weiß keine andere Rettung.

Ich warf mich ausgestreckt auf den Boden und schluchzte laut. Ich betete
um Erbarmen, um ein wenig Erbarmen von irgendwoher, um Zuflucht, um
irgendein Zeichen von Vergebung, eine Hoffnung, die das Ende bringen
könnte. »Herr!« gelobte ich, »ich will hier liegen und warten und warten
und weder Speise noch Trank anrühren, bis deine segnende Hand mich
berührt hat.«

Ich hörte das Geräusch von Tritten. Wer sagt, daß die Götter sich nicht
den Sterblichen zeigen? Ich wagte nicht mein Antlitz zu erheben, aus
Furcht, sein Anblick könne den Zauber verscheuchen. Komm, ach, komm und
laß deine Füße mein Haupt berühren! Komm, Herr, und setze deinen Fuß auf
mein pochendes Herz und laß mich in dem Augenblick sterben!

Er kam und setzte sich zu meinen Häupten. Wer? Mein Gatte! Im ersten
Augenblick, als ich seine Gegenwart fühlte, war mir, als sollten mir die
Sinne schwinden. Und dann brach all der Schmerz, der sich in meiner
Seele gestaut hatte, in einem unaufhaltsamen Tränenstrom hervor. Ich
preßte seine Füße an meinen Busen, als ob ich ihre Spur für immer dort
festhalten wollte.

Er streichelte zärtlich meinen Kopf. So empfing ich seinen Segen. Nun
werde ich morgen die Buße der öffentlichen Demütigung auf mich nehmen
können und sie mit geläutertem Herzen als Sühnopfer zu den Füßen meines
Gottes niederlegen.

Aber was meine Seele bedrückt, ist der Gedanke, daß die festlichen
Flöten, die vor neun Jahren bei meiner Hochzeit erklangen und mich in
diesem Hause willkommen hießen, mir nie in diesem Leben mehr erklingen
werden. Welche Buße gäbe es, die hart genug wäre, um mich noch einmal
als die für ihren Gatten geschmückte Braut auf denselben bräutlichen
Sitz zu erheben? Wieviel Jahre, wieviel Zeitalter, wieviel Weltalter
müssen vergehen, bis ich den Weg zurückfinde zu dem Platz, wo ich vor
neun Jahren stand?

Gott kann neue Dinge schaffen, aber hat selbst er die Macht, das neu zu
schaffen, was sich selbst zerstört hat?


Fußnoten:

[38] Zitat aus der Nationalhymne Bande Mataram.

[39] Rudra, »der Furchtbare« (eig. wohl »der Brüllende«), der
ursprüngliche Name Schivas (so im Veda).

[40] Leckerbissen, die als Festgeschenk geboten werden, müssen
von der Dame des Hauses selbst zubereitet sein.

[41] Indischer Monat, etwa von Mitte Jan. bis Mitte Febr.




ZWÖLFTES KAPITEL


NIKHILS ERZÄHLUNG

XV

Heute reisen wir nach Kalkutta. Wenn wir nur immer fortfahren, unsre
Freuden und Leiden anzuhäufen, lasten sie schwer auf uns. Wir sollten
sie von uns werfen, denn wir haben nicht hier unsre Stätte, sondern sind
Pilger auf dem Pfade des Lebens. Wenn wir hier unser Haus bauen, kerkern
wir unsre Seele ein, bis sie in der Kerkerluft erstickt.

Meine Vereinigung mit dir, Geliebte, war nur für die Pilgerfahrt, die
hinter uns liegt; sie war gut, solange wir denselben Weg gingen, sie
wird uns nur hemmen, wenn wir versuchen, sie darüber hinaus zu erhalten.
Jetzt streifen wir diese Fessel ab. Wir haben die Reise nach andern
Zielen angetreten, und es muß uns genug sein, wenn wir einander einen
Blick zuwerfen oder im Vorübergehen die Hand des andern streifen
können. Und danach? Danach gelangen wir auf die größere Heerstraße der
Welt, in den endlosen Strom des Alllebens.

Wie unermeßlich viel bleibt mir noch, wenn wir geschieden sind!
Geliebte! Wenn ich lausche, höre ich die Flöte spielen, ich höre den
Quell ihrer Melodien hervorströmen aus der Kluft, die uns trennt. Der
unsterbliche Trank der Göttin versiegt nie. Sie zerbricht nur bisweilen
den Becher, aus dem wir ihn trinken, und lächelt, wenn sie uns so
untröstlich sieht über den unbedeutenden Verlust. Ich will nicht
stillstehen und die Scherben auflesen. Ich will vorwärtsschreiten, wenn
auch mit durstendem Herzen.

Die Bara Rani kam und fragte mich: »Was bedeutet denn das, Bruder, daß
diese Bücher eingepackt und kistenweise weggeschickt werden?«

»Das bedeutet nur, daß ich meine Liebe zu ihnen noch nicht habe
überwinden können,« erwiderte ich.

»Ich wollte nur, daß du deine Liebe auch einigen andern Dingen noch
bewahrtest! Hast du denn die Absicht, gar nicht nach Hause
zurückzukommen?«

»Ich werde hin und wieder kommen, aber ich werde mich hier nicht wieder
ganz einmauern.«

»O wirklich! Nun, da komm einmal in mein Zimmer und sieh, an wieviel
Dingen ich mit meiner Liebe hänge!« Damit nahm sie mich bei der Hand und
führte mich ab.

Im Zimmer meiner Schwägerin fand ich zahllose Koffer und Bündel fertig
gepackt. Sie öffnete einen der Koffer und sagte: »Sieh, Bruder, da habe
ich all meine Sachen zur Bereitung von pan[42]. In dieser Flasche habe
ich Katschupuder, das mit dem Pollen von Schraubenbaumblüten gewürzt
ist. In den kleinen Zinndosen sind lauter verschiedene Gewürze. Auch
meine Spielkarten und mein Damenbrett habe ich nicht vergessen. Wenn ihr
beiden zu beschäftigt seid, so werde ich schon andre Freunde da finden,
die ein Spiel mit mir machen. Erinnerst du dich noch an diesen Kamm? Es
ist einer von den Swadeschi-Kämmen, die du mir mitbrachtest...«

»Aber was bedeutet dies alles, Schwester Rani? Warum hast du denn all
diese Sachen gepackt?«

»Denkst du, ich gehe nicht mit euch?«

»Aber welche Idee!«

»Hab keine Angst! Ich werde weder mit dir kokettieren noch mit der
Tschota Rani streiten. Man muß doch eines Tages sterben, und man tut
ebenso gut, das Ufer des heiligen Ganges aufzusuchen, bevor es zu spät
ist. Der Gedanke, hier auf eurem elenden Verbrennungsplatz unter dem
verkrüppelten Feigenbaum eingeäschert zu werden, ist entsetzlich, --
darum habe ich mich nicht entschließen können, zu sterben und dich so
lange geplagt.«

Hier sprach endlich mein Heim zu mir mit seiner wahren Stimme. Die Bara
Rani war als Braut in unser Haus gekommen, als ich erst sechs Jahre alt
war. Wir haben an den schläfrigen Nachmittagen zusammen in einer Ecke
der Terrasse des Daches gespielt. Ich habe ihr oben vom Baum herunter
grüne Mangofrüchte zugeworfen, aus denen sie köstlich unverdauliche
chutnees machte, indem sie sie in dünne Scheiben zerschnitt und mit
Senf, Salz und verschiedenen Kräutern würzte. Meine Aufgabe war es, ihr
all die verbotenen Sachen aus der Vorratskammer zu holen, die sie für
das Hochzeitsfest ihrer Puppe brauchte, denn der Strafkodex meiner
Großmutter ließ nur für mich Ausnahmen zu. Und sie wählte mich immer zum
Boten an ihren Bruder, wenn sie ihm etwas Besonderes abschmeicheln
wollte, denn meinen ungestümen Bitten konnte er nicht widerstehen. Ich
weiß noch, wie ich damals unter den strengen Maßregeln der Ärzte litt,
die bei Fieberanfällen nur warmes Wasser und Kardamomlimonade
gestatteten, und wie meine Schwägerin meine Entbehrungen nicht mit
ansehen konnte und mir heimlich Leckerbissen brachte. Was für Schelte
bekam sie eines Tages, als sie dabei ertappt wurde!

Und als wir dann größer wurden, waren die Leiden und Freuden, die uns
miteinander verbanden, ernsterer Art. Wie wir mitunter in Streit
gerieten! Bisweilen, wenn eigennützige Interessen uns trennten, stieg
Mißtrauen und Eifersucht auf und brachte einen Riß in unsre
Freundschaft; und als die Tschota Rani zwischen uns trat, sah es so aus,
als ob dieser Riß nie wieder heilen würde. Aber es zeigte sich immer,
daß die heilenden Kräfte am Grunde stärker waren als die Wunden an der
Oberfläche.

So ist von Kindheit an bis heute eine innige Freundschaft zwischen uns
emporgewachsen, deren dichtbelaubte Zweige sich über jedes Zimmer, jede
Veranda, jede Terrasse dieses großen Hauses breiten. Als ich sah, wie
die Bara Rani sich bereit machte, mit all ihrer Habe dies unser Haus zu
verlassen, da fühlte ich, wie es an allen Banden, die uns
zusammenhielten, bis in die äußersten Enden schmerzhaft zerrte.

Ich wußte wohl den Grund, warum sie sich entschlossen hatte, dem
Unbekannten zuzutreiben und alle jene Bande zu zerschneiden, die sie mit
den täglichen Gewohnheiten an das Haus knüpften, das sie nie einen Tag
verlassen, nachdem sie es mit neun Jahren zuerst betreten hatte. Und
doch wollte sie diesen wahren Grund nicht über ihre Lippen kommen
lassen, sondern verbarg ihn lieber hinter andern, nichtigen Vorwänden.

Ich war der einzige, der ihr von allen Verwandten auf der Welt geblieben
war, und die arme unglückliche, verwitwete und kinderlose Frau hegte
diese Verwandtschaft mit aller Zärtlichkeit, die sie in ihrem Herzen
aufgespeichert hatte. Wie tief sie unsre beabsichtigte Trennung
empfunden hatte, fühlte ich erst, als ich zwischen ihren umhergestreuten
Koffern und Bündeln stand.

Ich erkannte mit einem Blick, daß die kleinen Zwistigkeiten wegen
Geldangelegenheiten, die sie oft mit Bimala hatte, nicht niederm
Eigennutz entsprangen, sondern sie fühlte, daß diese andere Frau, die
von Gott weiß woher kam, ihre Ansprüche an den einzigen Verwandten, der
ihr geblieben war, zurückdrängte und das Band zwischen ihm und ihr
lockerte! Sie war bei jedem Schritt verletzt worden und hatte doch kein
Recht, sich zu beklagen.

Und Bimala? Auch sie fühlte, daß die Ansprüche der Bara Rani an mich
sich nicht nur auf unsre Verwandtschaft gründeten, sondern ihren
tieferen Grund hatten, und sie war eifersüchtig auf dies Verhältnis
zwischen uns, das in unsre Kindheit zurückreichte.

Nun schlug mein Herz heftig gegen die Tür meiner Brust. Ich sank auf
einen der Koffer nieder und sagte: »Ach, Schwester Rani, wie glücklich
wäre ich, wenn die alten Zeiten, wo wir uns zuerst in diesem unserm
alten Hause sahen, wiederkehren wollten!«

»Nein, lieber Bruder,« erwiderte sie mit einem Seufzer, »ich möchte mein
Leben nicht noch einmal leben, -- nicht als Frau! Laß das, was ich zu
tragen gehabt habe, nur mit dieser einen Existenz zu Ende sein! Ich
könnte es nicht noch einmal ertragen.«

Ich sagte zu ihr: »Die Freiheit, zu der wir durch Leid gelangen, ist
größer als das Leid.«

»Das mag bei euch Männern so sein. Die Freiheit ist für euch. Aber wir
Frauen möchten andere fesseln oder möchten noch lieber selbst von ihnen
gefesselt werden. Nein, nein, Bruder, du wirst dich aus unsern Netzen
nicht losmachen können. Wenn du denn deine Flügel ausbreiten und
wegfliegen mußt, so mußt du mich mit dir nehmen; wir wollen nicht
zurückbleiben. Darum habe ich all dies schwere Gepäck zusammengetragen.
Man darf euch Männer nicht mit zu leichter Ladung laufen lassen.«

»Ich fühle das Gewicht deiner Worte,« sagte ich lachend, »und wenn wir
Männer nicht über die Lasten, die ihr uns auferlegt, klagen, so
geschieht es, weil ihr Frauen uns so freigebig belohnt für das, was ihr
uns zu tragen gebt.«

»Ihr tragt es,« sagte sie, »weil die Last aus so vielen kleinen Dingen
besteht. Immer, wenn ihr eins davon zurückweisen wollt, so führt es zu
seinen Gunsten an, daß es so leicht ist. Und so drücken wir euch mit all
den leichten Dingen zu Boden... Wann reisen wir ab?«

»Der Zug fährt heute abend um halb zwölf. Wir haben reichlich Zeit.«

»Nun sei ein einziges Mal in deinem Leben artig und höre auf das, was
ich sage! Schlaf dich heute nachmittag ordentlich aus! Du weißt, du
kannst im Zuge nie schlafen. Du bist so herunter, daß du jeden
Augenblick zusammenklappen kannst. Komm, nimm erst dein Bad.«

Als wir nach meinem Zimmer gingen, kam Khema, das Mädchen, herauf. Sie
zupfte verlegen an ihrem Schleier und sagte in leisem, entschuldigendem
Ton, daß der Polizei-Inspektor mit einem Gefangenen gekommen sei und den
Maharadscha zu sprechen wünsche.

»Ist der Maharadscha ein Dieb oder ein Räuber,« fuhr die Bara Rani auf,
»daß die Polizei beständig hinter ihm her sein muß? Geh und sag' dem
Inspektor, daß der Maharadscha beim Baden ist!«

»Laß mich nur mal sehen, was los ist,« bat ich. »Es kann etwas
Dringendes sein.«

»Nein, nein,« beharrte meine Schwägerin. »Unsre Tschota Rani hat gestern
abend eine Unmenge Kuchen gebacken. Ich werde dem Inspektor ein paar
schicken, damit er ruhig bleibt, bis du fertig bist.« Damit schob sie
mich in mein Zimmer und schloß die Tür hinter mir zu.

Ich hatte nicht die Kraft, mich solcher Tyrannei zu widersetzen, -- sie
ist so selten in dieser Welt. Mochte der Inspektor sich die Zeit mit
Kuchenessen vertreiben. Was machte es, wenn die Pflicht einmal ruhte?

Die Polizei war diese letzten Tage eifrig am Werke gewesen, bald diesen,
bald jenen zu verhaften. Jeden Tag wurde irgendein Unschuldiger zur
Erheiterung der Angestellten in mein Geschäftszimmer geführt. Ich
vermutete, daß sie jetzt wieder so ein unglückliches Opfer
herangeschleppt hatten. Aber warum sollte der Inspektor allein sich an
Kuchen gütlich tun? Das war nicht in der Ordnung. Ich stieß heftig gegen
die Tür.

»Wenn du toll werden willst, gieß dir schnell etwas Wasser über den Kopf
-- das wird dich abkühlen,« sagte meine Schwägerin vom Korridor aus.

»Schicke Kuchen für zwei hinunter«, rief ich. »Der, den man als Dieb
eingebracht hat, verdient sie vielleicht noch mehr. Laß ihm eine
tüchtige Portion geben!«

Ich beeilte mich mit meinem Bad. Als ich herauskam, saß Bimala draußen
vor der Tür auf dem Boden[43]. War es möglich, daß dies meine alte
stolze, verwöhnte Bimala war?

Welche Gunst konnte sie erbitten wollen, als sie da so vor meiner Tür
saß? Als ich stutzte und stehenblieb, stand sie auf und sagte leise mit
niedergeschlagenen Augen: »Ich möchte dich sprechen.«

»So komm herein«, sagte ich.

»Aber hast du gerade etwas Besonderes vor?«

»Ja, aber das macht nichts. Ich möchte hören ...«

»Nein, besorge das erst! Wir sprechen dann heute mittag, wenn du
gegessen hast.«

Ich ging in mein Zimmer, wo der Polizei-Inspektor seinen Teller ganz
leer gegessen hatte.

Aber sein Begleiter war noch mit Essen beschäftigt.

»Halloh!« rief ich überrascht aus. »Du, Amulja?«

»Ja, ich«, sagte Amulja, den Mund voll Kuchen. »Das war ein richtiger
Festschmaus. Und wenn's Ihnen recht ist, nehme ich den Rest mit.« Damit
band er die übrigen Kuchen in sein Taschentuch.

»Was bedeutet dies?« fragte ich, mit einem erstaunten Blick auf den
Inspektor.

Der Mann lachte. »Wir sind in bezug auf den Dieb noch ebenso klug,«
sagte er, »inzwischen wird das Geheimnis des Diebstahls immer dunkler.«
Damit zog er ein eingewickeltes Bündel hervor, das sich, als er es
aufband, als ein Päckchen Banknoten entpuppte. »Hier, Maharadscha,«
sagte der Inspektor, »sind Ihre sechstausend Rupien.«

»Wo hat man sie gefunden?«

»In Amulja Babus Händen. Er kam gestern abend zu Ihrem Verwalter in
Tschakna und sagte ihm, daß das Geld sich gefunden habe. Der Verwalter
war anscheinend in noch größerer Bestürzung über die Wiedererlangung des
Geldes, als er über den Raub gewesen war. Er fürchtete, man könne ihn im
Verdacht haben, erst die Banknoten beiseite gebracht und nun, aus Angst,
daß es herauskäme, sich dies Ammenmärchen ausgedacht zu haben. Er bat
Amulja, noch etwas zu warten, er wolle ihm eine Erfrischung bringen,
und kam geradeswegs zum Polizeiamt. Ich brach sofort auf, nahm Amulja
mit mir und habe den ganzen Morgen versucht, etwas aus ihm
herauszubringen. Er will nicht sagen, wo er das Geld bekommen hat. Ich
warnte ihn, er würde solange in Haft bleiben, bis er es sagte. In dem
Fall, meinte er, würde er lügen müssen. Gut, sagte ich, das solle er nur
tun. Dann sagte er aus, er habe das Geld unter einem Busch gefunden. Ich
machte darauf ihn aufmerksam, daß das Lügen so leicht nicht sei. Unter
welchem Busch er es denn gefunden habe? Und an welchem Ort? Was hatte er
da zu tun? -- Über das alles würde er seine Aussagen machen müssen.
›Seien Sie unbesorgt,‹ sagte er, ›ich habe ja noch Zeit genug, mir das
alles auszudenken.‹«

»Aber, Inspektor,« sagte ich, »warum belästigen Sie einen achtbaren
jungen Menschen wie Amulja Babu?«

»Ich habe nicht den Wunsch, ihn zu belästigen«, sagte der Inspektor. »Er
ist nicht nur aus guter Familie, sondern noch dazu der Sohn meines
Schulfreundes, Nibaran Babu. Ich will Ihnen genau sagen, Maharadscha,
wie die Sache liegt. Amulja kennt den Dieb, aber will ihn schützen,
indem er den Verdacht auf sich lenkt. Solche Bravourstückchen sehen ihm
gerade ähnlich. Ich will Ihnen mal was sagen, junger Mann,« wandte er
sich an Amulja, »ich war auch einmal achtzehn und Student in Ripon
College. Ich wäre beinahe ins Gefängnis gekommen, weil ich versuchte,
einen Droschkenkutscher gegen einen Polizisten in Schutz zu nehmen. Ich
kam mit genauer Not davon.«

»Maharadscha,« fuhr er dann zu mir gewandt fort, »der wirkliche Dieb
wird nun wahrscheinlich entkommen, aber ich glaube, ich weiß, wer hinter
der ganzen Sache steckt.«

»Wer denn?« fragte ich.

»Jener Verwalter, im Einverständnis mit dem Wächter Kasim.«

Als der Inspektor endlich fortgegangen war, nachdem er mir seine
Hypothese lang und breit auseinandergesetzt hatte, sagte ich zu Amulja:
»Wenn du mir sagst, wer das Geld genommen hat, verspreche ich dir, daß
niemandem ein Leid geschehen soll.«

»Ich habe es getan«, sagte er.

»Aber wie ist es möglich? Wie war denn das mit der ganzen Schar
bewaffneter Männer?...«

»Das war ich, ganz allein!«

Was Amulja mir nun erzählte, war in der Tat eine seltsame Geschichte.
Der Verwalter war gerade mit seinem Abendbrot fertig und dabei, sich auf
der Veranda den Mund zu spülen. Es war ziemlich dunkel. Amulja hatte in
jeder Tasche einen Revolver, von denen einer mit Platzpatronen, der
andre mit Kugeln geladen war. Vor dem Gesicht hatte er eine Maske. Er
hielt dem Verwalter plötzlich eine Blendlaterne vors Gesicht und gab
einen blinden Schuß ab. Der Mann fiel in Ohnmacht. Ein paar von den
Wächtern, die dienstfrei waren, kamen herzugelaufen, aber sobald Amulja
auch auf sie einen blinden Schuß abgab, verloren sie keine Zeit, sich in
Sicherheit zu bringen. Dann kam Kasim, der Dienst hatte, mit einem
dicken Knüppel herbeigestürzt. Diesmal feuerte Amulja einen scharfen
Schuß ab, wobei er nach Kasims Beinen zielte, und als dieser fühlte, daß
er getroffen war, brach er zusammen und fiel zu Boden. Amulja zwang dann
den zitternden Verwalter, der inzwischen zur Besinnung gekommen war, den
Geldschrank zu öffnen und ihm 6000 Rupien einzuhändigen. Darauf nahm er
eins von den Dienstpferden, galoppierte ein paar Meilen, ließ dann das
Pferd frei laufen und kam ruhig zu Fuß hierher zurück.

»Was veranlaßte dich zu diesem Streich, Amulja?« fragte ich.

»Ich hatte einen sehr gewichtigen Grund, Maharadscha«, erwiderte er.

»Aber warum versuchtest du denn, das Geld zurückzugeben?«

»Rufen Sie sie, auf deren Befehl ich es tat! In ihrer Gegenwart werde
ich alles bekennen.«

»Und wer ist ›sie‹?«

»Meine Schwester, die Tschota Rani!«

Ich ließ Bimala rufen. Sie kam zögernd, barfuß, den Kopf in einen weißen
Schal gehüllt. Ich hatte meine Bima nie so gesehen. Es war, als ob sie
sich in Morgenlicht gehüllt hätte.

Amulja warf sich vor ihr nieder und berührte ehrfurchtsvoll ihre Füße.
Als er sich dann erhob, sagte er: »Ihr Befehl ist ausgeführt,
Schwester. Das Geld ist zurückgegeben.«

»Du hast mich gerettet, mein kleiner Bruder«, sagte Bima.

»Ich habe immer Ihr Bild vor Augen gehabt und keine einzige Lüge
gesagt«, fuhr Amulja fort. »Mein Losungswort Bande Mataram habe ich zu
Ihren Füßen auf immer von mir geworfen. Ich habe auch schon meine
Belohnung bekommen, Ihren prasad, sobald ich in den Palast kam.«

Bima sah ihn bei seinen letzten Worten verständnislos an. Amulja zog
sein Taschentuch hervor, band es auf und zeigte ihr die Kuchen. »Ich
habe sie nicht alle gegessen«, sagte er. »Diese habe ich noch
aufbewahrt, damit Sie sie mir selbst vorlegen.«

Ich sah, daß ich hier überflüssig war und ging aus dem Zimmer. Ich
konnte predigen, soviel ich wollte, so sagte ich mir, zum Lohn für meine
Mühe verbrannte man mein Bild. Es war mir noch nicht gelungen, eine
einzige Seele vom Pfade des Verderbens zurückzubringen. Wer die Gabe
hat, kann es durch einen bloßen Wink. Meine Worte haben nicht diese
unauslöschliche Wirkung. Ich bin keine Flamme, sondern nur eine
schwarze, ausgebrannte Kohle. Ich kann keine Lampe anzünden. Mein Leben
zeigt es, -- meine Lampen bleiben alle unangezündet.


XVI

Ich kehrte langsam nach den innern Gemächern zurück. Unwillkürlich
lenkte ich meine Schritte nach dem Zimmer der Bara Rani. Ich hatte das
unwiderstehliche Bedürfnis, zu fühlen, daß dies mein Leben imstande
gewesen war, auf einer andern Lebensharfe eine Saite anzuschlagen, die
mir mit vollem, warmem Ton antwortete. Man kann die Erfüllung seines
Daseins nicht in sich selber finden, man muß sie draußen suchen.

Als ich an das Zimmer meiner Schwägerin kam, trat sie heraus und sagte:
»Ich fürchtete, du würdest dich schon wieder so lange aufhalten. Doch
ich habe dein Mittagessen schon bestellt, sobald ich dich kommen hörte.
Es wird sogleich gebracht.«

»Inzwischen will ich dein Geld aus meinem Schrank holen, damit ich es
bereit habe.«

Als wir nach meinem Zimmer gingen, fragte sie mich, ob der
Polizei-Inspektor irgendwelche Nachricht über den Raubüberfall gebracht
hätte. Ich hatte keine rechte Neigung, ihr eingehend zu berichten, wie
das Geld zurückgebracht worden sei, und antwortete ausweichend: »Ja,
sie machen viel Wesens von der Geschichte.«

Als ich in mein Ankleidezimmer kam und mein Schlüsselbund herausnahm,
war der Schlüssel zum Geldschrank nicht an dem Ring. Wie konnte ich nur
so blödsinnig zerstreut sein! Erst heute morgen hatte ich alle möglichen
Koffer und Schränke geöffnet und gar nicht bemerkt, daß dieser Schlüssel
fehlte.

»Was ist denn mit deinem Schlüssel passiert?« fragte meine Schwägerin.

Ich konnte es ihr nicht sagen und fuhr fort, eine Tasche um die andere
zu durchsuchen. Immer wieder suchte ich an denselben Stellen. Es wurde
uns beiden klar, daß der Schlüssel nicht verlegt sein könne. Jemand
mußte ihn vom Ring abgenommen haben. Wer konnte das sein? Wer hatte denn
sonst noch in dies Zimmer kommen können?

»Sorge dich nicht weiter darum«, sagte sie zu mir. »Iß erst zu Mittag!
Die Tschota Rani muß ihn selbst an sich genommen haben, als sie sah, wie
zerstreut du immer bist.«

Ich war innerlich jedoch sehr unruhig. Bima hatte nie einen von meinen
Schlüsseln genommen, ohne es mir zu sagen. Beim Mittagessen war sie
nicht zugegen; sie war damit beschäftigt, Amulja in ihrem Zimmer zu
bewirten. Meine Schwägerin wollte sie rufen lassen, aber ich bat sie, es
nicht zu tun.

Ich war gerade mit dem Essen fertig, als Bima hereinkam. Ich hätte
lieber nicht über die Sache mit dem Schlüssel gesprochen, solange die
Bara Rani dabei war, aber sobald sie Bima sah, fragte sie: »Weißt du,
mein Liebling, wo der Schlüssel zu dem Geldschrank ist?«

»Ich habe ihn«, war die Antwort.

»Habe ich's nicht gesagt?« rief meine Schwägerin triumphierend. »Unsre
Tschota Rani tut so, als ob diese Räubereien sie ganz kalt lassen, aber
heimlich trifft sie doch ihre Vorsichtsmaßregeln.«

Der Ausdruck in Bimas Gesicht ließ mich nichts Gutes ahnen. »Laßt den
Schlüssel jetzt«, sagte ich. »Ich nehme das Geld heute abend heraus.«

»Nun schiebst du es wieder auf«, sagte die Bara Rani. »Warum willst du
es nicht gleich jetzt, wo du daran denkst, herausnehmen und zum
Schatzamt schicken?«

»Ich habe es schon herausgenommen«, sagte Bima.

Ich stutzte.

»Wo hast du es denn?« fragte meine Schwägerin.

»Ich habe es ausgegeben.«

»Nun höre einer! Wofür hast du all das Geld ausgegeben?«

Bima antwortete nicht. Ich fragte nicht weiter. Die Bara Rani schien
etwas bemerken zu wollen, aber sie besann sich anders. »Nun, dann ist ja
alles in Ordnung«, sagte sie mit einem Blick auf mich. »Das machte ich
genau so mit meines Mannes Kleingeld. Ich wußte, es hatte keinen Sinn,
es ihm zu lassen, -- seine neunundneunzig Schmarotzer hätten es ihm doch
abgenommen. Du bist auch nicht viel anders, Bruder. Wieviel Mittel ihr
Männer habt, um Geld loszuwerden! Wir können es euch nur retten dadurch,
daß wir es euch stehlen. Nun komm aber! Fort mit dir, zu Bett!«

Die Bara Rani führte mich in mein Zimmer, aber ich wußte kaum, wohin ich
ging. Sie setzte sich an mein Bett, nachdem ich mich darauf
ausgestreckt hatte, und lächelte Bima zu. »Gib mir einen von deinen
pans, liebe Tschotie«, sagte sie. »Was, du hast keine? Du bist mir eine
schöne Hausfrau! Dann laß ein paar aus meinem Zimmer holen!«

»Aber hast du denn schon zu Mittag gegessen?« fragte ich besorgt.

»O, schon längst«, erwiderte sie. Das war augenscheinlich geflunkert.

Sie blieb neben meinem Bett sitzen und plauderte über alles Mögliche.
Das Mädchen kam und sagte Bima, daß ihr Mittagessen serviert sei und
kalt würde, aber sie schien es nicht zu hören. »Was, du hast noch nicht
gegessen? Was machst du für Geschichten! Es ist schon furchtbar spät.«
Damit führte die Bara Rani Bima mit sich fort.

Ich konnte erraten, daß zwischen diesen 6000 Rupien und dem Diebstahl
der andern ein Zusammenhang bestand. Aber ich bin nicht neugierig, zu
wissen, welcher Art er ist. Ich werde nie danach fragen.

Die Vorsehung formt unser Leben im groben, sie will, daß wir selbst die
letzte Hand anlegen und ihm seine endgültige Gestalt nach unserm Sinn
geben. Ich habe mich immer bemüht, bei der Gestaltung meines Lebens den
vom Schöpfer vorgezeichneten Linien zu folgen und ihm einen tiefen Sinn
zu geben. In diesem Bestreben habe ich mein ganzes Leben verbracht. Wie
ernstlich ich mich bemüht habe, meine Begierden im Zaum zu halten und
jede Selbstsucht in mir zu unterdrücken, weiß nur Er, der in unser Herz
sieht.

Aber die Schwierigkeit ist, daß unser Leben nicht uns allein gehört. Wir
können es nicht formen ohne die Hilfe unsrer Umgebung. Daher war es
immer mein Traum, Bima dafür zu gewinnen, daß sie mir bei dieser Arbeit
helfe. Ich liebte sie von ganzer Seele; daher glaubte ich fest, es müsse
mir gelingen.

Dann machte ich die Entdeckung, daß ich nicht zu den Menschen gehöre,
die so ganz einfach und natürlich ihre Umgebung zu dieser Arbeit an
ihrem Selbst heranziehen können. Ich habe den Lebensfunken erhalten,
aber ich kann ihn nicht weitergeben. Die, denen ich mein Alles gegeben
habe, haben es genommen, ohne mich selbst mitzunehmen.

Ich werde wirklich schwer geprüft. Immer, wenn ich am meisten eines
helfenden Gefährten bedarf, werde ich auf mich selbst zurückgewiesen.
Dennoch gelobe ich aufs neue, durchzuhalten in dieser Prüfungszeit.

So will ich denn allein meinen Dornenpfad gehen, bis die Reise dieses
Lebens zu Ende ist...

Mir ist der Gedanke gekommen, daß ich doch immer etwas Neigung zur
Tyrannei gehabt habe. Es war ein gewisser Despotismus in meinem
Verlangen, meine Beziehungen zu Bimala in eine feste, klar umrissene und
vollkommene Form zu bringen. Aber des Menschen Leben ist nicht dazu
bestimmt, in eine feste Form gepreßt zu werden. Und wenn wir versuchen,
dem Guten auf solche Weise Gestalt zu geben, als wäre es bloßer Stoff,
so rächt es sich furchtbar, dadurch, daß es das Leben verliert.

Erst jetzt ist es mir klar geworden, daß es diese unbewußte Tyrannei
gewesen sein muß, die uns allmählich voneinander entfernte. Als Bimalas
Leben nicht zu seiner wahren Höhe aufsteigen konnte, da ich es von oben
niederdrückte, mußte es sich dadurch einen Abfluß suchen, daß es seine
Ufer am Grunde unterhöhlte. Sie mußte diese 6000 Rupien stehlen, weil
sie mir gegenüber nicht offen sein konnte, weil sie fühlte, daß ich für
gewisse Dinge kein Verständnis hatte noch haben wollte.

Menschen wie ich, die von einer Idee beherrscht werden, sind mit denen
im Einklang, die ihren Überzeugungen zustimmen können; aber die andern
können nur mit uns fertig werden, wenn sie uns betrügen. Unser
hartnäckiger Eigensinn ist es, der selbst die Offensten und Geradesten
auf krumme Wege treibt. Bei dem Versuch, uns eine Gefährtin nach unserm
Sinn zu formen, verderben wir das Weib.

Könnte ich nicht noch einmal von vorn anfangen? Ja, dann würde ich den
Pfad der Einfalt gehen. Ich würde nicht versuchen, die Gefährtin meines
Lebens mit meinen Ideen zu binden, sondern die fröhliche Flöte meiner
Liebe spielen und fragen: Liebst du mich? Dann wachse nur, dir selber
treu, im Licht deiner Liebe! Laß Gottes Plan, der in dir lebendig ist,
triumphieren und laß meine Pläne beschämt umkehren!

Aber kann selbst die große Heilmutter Natur die Wunde heilen, die all
das Mißverstehen dieser letzten Zeit uns schlug? Die schützende Hülle,
unter der allein die stillen Kräfte der Natur wirken können, ist
auseinander gerissen. Wunden müssen verbunden werden -- können wir unsre
Wunde nicht mit unsrer Liebe verbinden, so daß ein Tag kommt, wo ihre
Narbe nicht mehr sichtbar sein wird? Ist es nicht zu spät? Wir haben so
viel Zeit verloren mit Mißverstehen; wir haben die ganze Zeit bis jetzt
gebraucht, um endlich zu verstehen, -- wie lange Zeit werden wir
brauchen, um wieder gutzumachen? Und wenn die Wunde wirklich heilt, --
kann die Zerstörung, die sie verursacht hat, je wieder gutgemacht
werden?

Ich hörte ein leises Geräusch an der Tür. Als ich mich umwandte, sah ich
Bimala durch die offene Tür verschwinden. Sie mußte an der Schwelle
gewartet haben, unschlüssig, ob sie hereinkommen sollte, und schließlich
hatte sie sich entschlossen, umzukehren. Ich sprang auf und stürzte zur
Tür und rief: »Bima!«

Sie stand still, doch wandte sie sich nicht um. Ich trat zu ihr, nahm
sie bei der Hand und führte sie in unser Zimmer zurück. Sie warf sich
mit dem Gesicht aufs Kissen und schluchzte unaufhaltsam. Ich sagte
nichts, sondern setzte mich nur still zu ihr und hielt ihre Hand.

Als der leidenschaftliche Ausbruch ihres Schmerzes sich gelegt hatte,
richtete sie sich auf. Ich wollte sie an meine Brust ziehen, aber sie
schob meine Arme zurück und kniete vor mir nieder, indem sie wiederholt
meine Füße ehrfurchtsvoll mit ihrer Stirn berührte. Ich zog hastig meine
Füße zurück, aber sie umklammerte sie mit ihren Armen und sagte mit
tränenerstickter Stimme. »Nein, nein, nein, du darfst deine Füße nicht
wegziehen! Laß mich meine Ehrfurcht verrichten!«

Da ließ ich sie gewähren.


Fußnoten:

[42] Rollen aus Betelpfefferblättern mit Stücken von Betelnuß,
Katschu und Gewürzen gefüllt, die als Kaumittel verwandt werden.

[43] Auf dem nackten Boden sitzen ist ein Zeichen von Trauer
und, von da aus übertragen, auch von Zerknirschung.


BIMALAS ERZÄHLUNG

XXIII

Auf, meine Seele! Jetzt ist die Zeit gekommen, dich dahin einzuschiffen,
wo der Strom der Liebe einmündet in das große Meer der Anbetung. In
diesem reinen Blau versinkt und verschwindet die ganze Last seines
Schlammes.

Jetzt fürchte ich nichts mehr, -- weder mich selbst, noch irgend jemand
anders. Ich bin durch Feuer hindurchgegangen. Was entzündlich war, ist
zu Asche verbrannt, was geblieben ist, ist unsterblich. Ich habe meine
Seele dem zu Füßen gelegt, der all meine Sünde in den Abgrund seines
eigenen Schmerzes versenkt hat.

Heute abend reisen wir nach Kalkutta. Meine innern Unruhen ließen mich
bis jetzt nicht dazu kommen, nach meinen Sachen zu sehen. Jetzt will ich
sie ordnen und einpacken.

Nach einer Weile merkte ich, daß mein Gatte auch gekommen war und beim
Packen half.

»Das geht aber nicht«, sagte ich. »Hast du mir nicht versprochen, zu
schlafen?«

»Das habe ich wohl versprochen,« erwiderte er, »aber der Schlaf hat mir
nicht versprochen, zu kommen und ist nirgends zu finden.«

»Nein, nein,« wiederholte ich, »das geht nicht. Leg dich wenigstens ein
Weilchen hin!«

»Aber wie kannst du allein dies noch alles schaffen?«

»Natürlich kann ich das.«

»Nun, du magst dich rühmen, ohne mich fertig werden zu können. Aber
offen gesagt, ich kann nicht ohne dich fertig werden. Selbst der Schlaf
wollte zu mir allein nicht in unser Zimmer kommen.« Damit machte er sich
wieder an die Arbeit.

Aber es kam eine Unterbrechung in Gestalt eines Dieners, der meldete,
daß Sandip Babu da sei und bäte, vorgelassen zu werden. Ich wagte nicht
zu fragen, wen er zu sprechen wünsche. Es war, als ob das Licht des
Himmels plötzlich zurückwiche wie die Blätter einer Mimose.

»Komm, Bima!« sagte mein Gatte. »Laß uns hören, was Sandip uns zu sagen
hat! Da er zurückgekommen ist, nachdem er sich schon verabschiedet
hatte, muß er uns etwas Besonderes zu sagen haben.«

Ich ging nur mit, weil es noch schwieriger gewesen wäre,
zurückzubleiben. Sandip starrte ein Bild an, das an der Wand hing. Als
wir eintraten, sagte er: »Ihr fragt euch gewiß, warum der Bursche noch
einmal wiedergekommen ist. Aber ihr wißt, der Geist ist nicht gebannt,
bis alle feierlichen Bräuche erfüllt sind.« Mit diesen Worten zog er
etwas aus seiner Tasche, das er in sein Taschentuch gebunden hatte,
legte es auf den Tisch und löste den Knoten auf. Es waren jene
Goldstücke.

»Versteh mich nicht falsch, Nikhil,« sagte er. »Du mußt dir nicht
einbilden, daß ich, von deinem Umgang angesteckt, plötzlich ehrlich
geworden bin; ich bin nicht der Mann, der mit schlotternden Knieen reuig
zurückkehrt, um unrechtmäßig erworbenes Geld wiederzubringen. Aber...«

Er stockte. Nach einer Pause wandte er sich zu Nikhil, aber seine Worte
waren an mich gerichtet:

»Ja, Bienenkönigin, endlich hat der Geist der Reue Einlaß gefunden in
meinem bisher ungestört ruhigen Gewissen. Da ich jede Nacht, sobald der
erste Schlaf vorüber ist, mit ihm zu kämpfen habe, kann ich ihn nicht
für ein bloßes Hirngespinst halten. Es gibt vor ihm kein Entrinnen,
selbst für mich nicht, bis die Schuld bezahlt ist. In die Hände jenes
Geistes lege ich daher, was ich zurückbringe. Göttin! Ihnen allein auf
der Welt kann ich nichts wegnehmen. Sie lassen mich nicht los, bis ich
ganz entblößt bin. Nehmen Sie auch dies zurück!«

Damit zog er den Schmuckkasten unter seinem Mantel hervor und setzte ihn
hin, und dann verließ er uns mit hastigen Schritten.

»Höre, Sandip,« rief mein Gatte ihm nach.

»Ich habe keine Zeit, Nikhil,« sagte Sandip, an der Tür stehenbleibend.
»Man sagt mir, daß die Muselmänner mich für einen unschätzbaren
Edelstein halten, und hinter mir her sind, um mich zu rauben und auf
ihrem Friedhof zu vergraben. Aber ich fühle, daß ich noch weiterleben
muß. Ich habe noch gerade 25 Minuten, um den Zug nach Norden zu
bekommen. Daher muß ich für jetzt Schluß machen; wir werden unsre
Unterredung bei der nächsten passenden Gelegenheit zu Ende führen. Wenn
du meinen Rat hören willst, so zögre du auch nicht, von hier
fortzukommen! Ich grüße Sie, Bienenkönigin, Königin der blutenden
Herzen, Königin der Vernichtung!«

Er stürzte hinaus. Ich stand unbeweglich; nie vorher war mir so klar
geworden, wie wertlos, wie armselig dies Gold und diese Juwelen sind.
Noch kurz vorher war ich geschäftig gewesen, mir zu überlegen, was ich
mitnehmen und wie ich es einpacken wollte. Jetzt fühlte ich, daß es
überhaupt nicht nötig war, irgendetwas mitzunehmen. Aufbrechen und
fortreisen so schnell wie möglich, darauf kam es an.

Mein Gatte trat zu mir und faßte meine Hand. »Es wird spät,« sagte er,
»wir haben nicht mehr viel Zeit, unsre Reisevorbereitungen zu beenden.«

In diesem Augenblick kam Tschandranath Babu plötzlich herein. Als er uns
beisammen fand, wich er erst zurück, doch dann sagte er: »Verzeihen Sie,
Mütterchen, wenn ich störe! Nikhil, die Muselmänner haben sich erhoben.
Sie plündern Harisch Kundus Schatzhaus. Das ist noch nicht so schlimm.
Aber entsetzlich ist es, wie sie den Frauen des Hauses Gewalt antun.«

»Ich komme,« sagte mein Gatte.

»Was kannst du da tun?« sagte ich und hielt bittend seine Hand fest.
»Ach Herr,« wandte ich mich an seinen Lehrer, »wollen Sie ihm nicht
sagen, daß er nicht hingeht?«

»Es gibt nichts Dringenderes zu tun, Mütterchen,« erwiderte er.

»Ängstige dich nicht, Bima,« rief mein Gatte mir im Fortgehen zu.

Als ich ans Fenster trat, sah ich ihn zu Pferde fortgaloppieren, ohne
irgendwelche Waffe in der Hand.

Gleich darauf kam die Bara Rani hereingestürzt. »Was hast du getan,
liebe Tschotie?« rief sie. »Wie konntest du ihn fortlassen?«

»Ruf sofort den Dewan[44],« sagte sie zu einem Diener.

Die Ranis zeigen sich sonst nicht dem Dewan, aber in dem Augenblick
waren der Bara Rani alle äußeren Formen gleichgültig.

»Schick dem Maharadscha sofort einen reitenden Boten nach und laß ihn
zurückrufen,« sagte sie, sobald der Dewan erschien.

»Wir haben ihn alle beschworen, nicht hinzureiten,« sagte der Dewan,
»aber er wollte nicht umkehren.«

»Laß ihm sagen, daß die Bara Rani krank ist, daß sie auf dem Sterbebett
liegt!« rief meine Schwägerin verzweifelt.

Als der Dewan hinausgegangen war, wandte sie sich wütend gegen mich. »O
du Hexe, du Ungetüm, konntest du nicht selbst sterben, statt ihn in den
Tod zu schicken!...«

Es begann zu dunkeln. Die Sonne ging hinter dem gefiederten Laubwerk des
blühenden Sadschnabaums unter. Ich sehe noch heute jede leise
Schattierung jenes Sonnenuntergangs vor mir. Zwei Wolkenmassen zu beiden
Seiten der sinkenden Sonnenscheibe gaben ihr das Aussehen eines
gewaltigen Vogels, der seine feurig gefiederten Schwingen weit
ausbreitete. Es war mir, als ob dieser verhängnisvolle Tag sich
aufmachte zu seinem Fluge über den Ozean der Nacht.

Es wurde dunkler und dunkler. Aus der Ferne wogte Waffenlärm heran und
wich dann wieder in das Dunkel zurück, wie die Flammen eines brennenden
Dorfes fern am Horizont aufzucken und wieder verschwinden.

Die Abendglocken erklangen von unserm Tempel. Ich wußte, die Bara Rani
saß jetzt da, die Hände in stillem Gebet gefaltet. Aber ich konnte
keinen Schritt vom Fenster weichen.

Die Straßen, das Dorf dahinter und die noch entfernteren Baumreihen
verschwammen immer mehr im Dunkel. Der See in unserm Park blickte mit
trübem Glanz zum Himmel auf, wie das Auge eines Blinden. Zur Linken
schien der Turm seinen Hals auszurecken, um etwas, was in der Ferne
geschah, zu erspähen.

Die Geräusche der Nacht nehmen alle Arten von Verkleidungen an. Ein
Zweig knackt, und man glaubt, ein Verfolgter renne um sein Leben. Eine
Tür schlägt zu, und es ist einem, als ob das Herz der Welt in jähem
Schreck pochte.

Lichter flackerten plötzlich unter dem Schatten der fernen Bäume auf und
verschwanden wieder. Ab und zu erklirrten Hufe, doch es waren nur
Reiter, die aus den Palasttoren ritten.

Ich hatte die ganze Zeit das Gefühl, daß, wenn ich nur sterben könnte,
alles gut sein würde. Solange ich lebte, griffen meine Sünden immer
weiter um sich und säten nach allen Seiten Zerstörung aus. Ich erinnerte
mich an die Pistole in meiner Truhe. Aber meine Füße wollten nicht vom
Fenster weg und sie holen. Wartete ich denn nicht auf mein Schicksal?

Die Nachtwache kündete feierlich die zehnte Stunde. Bald darauf tauchten
in der Ferne eine ganze Reihe Lichter auf, und eine große Schar von
Leuten wand sich wie eine große Schlange auf den dunklen Wegen den
Palasttoren zu.

Der Dewan stürzte ans Tor. In demselben Augenblick galoppierte ein
Reiter herein. »Wie steht es, Dschata?« fragte der Dewan.

»Nicht gut,« war die Antwort.

Ich hörte diese Worte ganz deutlich von meinem Fenster aus. Aber dann
wurde etwas geflüstert, was ich nicht verstehen konnte.

Dann kam eine Sänfte, der eine Bahre folgte. Der Doktor ging neben der
Sänfte.

»Was meinen Sie, Doktor?« fragte der Dewan.

»Ich kann noch nichts sagen,« erwiderte der Doktor. »Die Wunde am Kopf
ist ernst.«

»Und Amulja Babu?«

»Mit ihm ist es aus. Eine Kugel hat ihn ins Herz getroffen.«


Fußnoten:

[44] Eingeborener Angestellter eines großen bengalischen
Haushaltes, der den Verkehr mit den Eingeborenen vermittelt.




INHALT


          _Erstes Kapitel_

      Bimalas Erzählung I-III                 1


          _Zweites Kapitel_

      Bimalas Erzählung IV-V                 28

      Nikhils Erzählung I-II                 51

      Sandips Erzählung I                    62


          _Drittes Kapitel_

      Bimalas Erzählung VI                   71

      Sandips Erzählung II-III               78


          _Viertes Kapitel_

      Nikhils Erzählung III                 104

      Bimalas Erzählung VII-X               113

      Sandips Erzählung IV-VI               136


          _Fünftes Kapitel_

      Nikhils Erzählung IV-V                151

      Bimalas Erzählung XI-XIII             163

      Nikhils Erzählung VI-VII              182


          _Sechstes Kapitel_

      Nikhils Erzählung VIII-IX             192

      Sandips Erzählung VII                 207


          _Siebentes Kapitel_

      Sandips Erzählung VIII-X              218


          _Achtes Kapitel_

      Nikhils Erzählung X-XI                245

      Bimalas Erzählung XIV                 264


          _Neuntes Kapitel_

      Bimalas Erzählung XV-XVII             277


          _Zehntes Kapitel_

      Nikhils Erzählung XII-XIV             314

      Bimalas Erzählung XVIII-XIX           330


          _Elftes Kapitel_

      Bimalas Erzählung XX-XXII             344


          _Zwölftes Kapitel_

      Nikhils Erzählung XV-XVI              372

      Bimalas Erzählung XXIII               399




                              [Illustration]

                               _Gedruckt
                          im Frühjahr 1921 von
                             der Spamerschen
                              Buchdruckerei
                               in Leipzig_
                                    *




Notizen des Bearbeiters:

Gesperrte Schrift markiert durch   _ ... _

Unterschiedliche Schreibweisen wurden nicht geändert.

Typographische Fehler und einzelne Satzzeichen wurden still-
schweigend geändert.





End of Project Gutenberg's Das Heim und die Welt, by Rabindranath Tagore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAS HEIM UND DIE WELT ***

***** This file should be named 52643-0.txt or 52643-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/6/4/52643/

Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Matthias Grammel and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
