The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Gardener, by Rabindranath Tagore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Gardener

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Translator: Hans Effenberger

Release Date: December 14, 2013 [EBook # 44424]

Language: German

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DER GÄRTNER ***




Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Marc-Andre Seekamp and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Notes on the transcription: Text printed in a locked manner in the original
was marked with _. Text originally printed in Antiqua was marked with
~ marked. ]




  RABINDRANATH TAGORE

    THE GARDENER

MUNICH

KURT WOLFF VERLAG

Only authorized German edition. After that of Rabindranath Tagore
self-organized English edition translated into German by
Hans Effenberger

69-78 thousand

Copyright 1921 by Kurt Wolff Verlag A.-G. in Munich




FOREWORD OF THE POET


Most of the love and life poetry in this volume is before
of the religious poetry collection "Gitanjali". The English
Translation isn't always literal - sometimes the originals are
abbreviated and sometimes paraphrased.




THE GARDENER


_Servant_

Have mercy on your servant, queen!

_Queen_

The feast is over and all my servants have left. Why come
You at this late hour?

_Servant_

Have you sent the others away, it is ~ my ~ time.

I come to ask what is left of your last servant to do.

_Queen_

What can you expect since it's too late?

_Servant_

Make me the gardener of your flower garden.

_Queen_

What folly!

_Servant_

I want to quit my old job.

I throw sword and lance in the dust. Don't send me any more
distant courts; do not bid me undress to new victories. Make me
Gardener of your flower garden.

_Queen_

What would your duties be?

_Servant_

Serve you in your idle days.

I want to keep the grass path fresh in the morning
walk where flowers, addicted to death, your feet with every step
greet cheerfully.

I want you to swing in a swing under the branches of
Saptaparna, where the early evening moon will struggle through the foliage, Dir
To kiss the hem of your dress.

I will fill the lamp next to your bed with fragrant oil
burns, and decorate the stool of your feet with sandal and saffron paste
in a strange drawing.

_Queen_

What should your wages be?

_Servant_

Holding your little fists like tender lotus buds, and
To brush chains of flowers over your joints; and dye the soles of your feet
are allowed to kiss the stain with the red juice of the Ashoka flowers and away
Dust that may still hesitate there.

_Queen_

Your requests, my servant, are granted; you will be my gardener
Be a flower garden.




2


  “Poet, the evening is coming; Your hair turns gray.
  "Do you hear messages from the hereafter in your lonely senses?"

  “It's evening,” said the poet, “and I'm listening because someone is calling
      can go from the village, even if it is late.
  “I watch: whether young, erring hearts find each other, and two couples
      wistful eyes begging for music that would break their silence and
      talked for her.
  “Who should weave their passion into songs when I'm on the shore of the
      Sit life and contemplate death and what is beyond?

  “The early evening star disappears.
  “The glow of a death fire gradually dies on the silent river.
  “Jackals howl in the choir from the courtyard of the deserted house, in the light of the
      exhausted moon.
  “If there came a wanderer leaving his home, the night would come
      watch and bow to the murmur of the darkness
      listen to who should give him the secrets of life in his ear
      whisper when closing my gates and trying to set myself free
      of earthly gangs?

  “It doesn't mean much for my hair to turn gray.
  “I'm always as young or as old as the youngest or the oldest in
      this village.
  “Some have smiles, cute and simple, and some have smart ones
      Blink in her eyes.
  "Some have tears that rise in the daylight, and others have tears,
      that are hidden in the dark.
  “They all need me, and I don't have time to worry about that
      brood.
  “I'm the same age as everyone, what does it matter if my hair is gray
      becomes?"




3rd


  In the morning I threw my net into the sea.
  From the dark depths I lifted things that were strange and strange in appearance
      Beauty - some shone like a smile, some shone
      like tears, and some were flushed with blush like cheeks
      a bride. When I came home with my day's burden, mine was there
      Beloved in the garden, idly picking the leaves of a flower.
  I hesitated for a while and then I put everything I did at her feet
      had lifted and stood in silence.
  Her gaze fell on it and she said, “What strange things are
      the? I don't know what they are good for! "
  I bowed my head in shame and thought, “I don't have any of this
      acquired in battle, I did not buy it in the market; it
      are not the right gifts for them. "
  Then I threw one after the other on the street all long night.
  In the morning hikers came; they picked it up and carried it to strangers
      Countries.




4th


  Oh, why did they build my house on the street to the market town?
  They moor up by my trees with their loaded boats.
  They come and go and wander as they please.
  I sit and watch them; my life is running out.
  I cannot turn you away. And so my days go by.

  Night and day their steps echo at my door.
  In vain I shout: “I don't know you.” Feel in some of them
      my fingers are acquaintances, in others my nostrils, the blood in mine
      She seems to know Veins, and some are my dreams
      familiar.
  I cannot turn you away. I call her and say, “Come into mine
      House, whoever of you likes. Yes, come! "

  In the morning the bell rings from the temple. They come with their baskets
      in the hands. Her feet are reddened like roses. The early light
      the twilight lies on their faces.
  I cannot turn you away. I call her and I say, “Come in
      pick flowers in my garden. Come here! "

  At noon the gong sounds at the gate of the palace.
  I do not know why they leave their work and on my hedge
      standing around
  The flowers in her hair are pale and withered. The sounds of their flutes
      sound dull.
  I cannot turn you away. I call them and say: “The shadow
      is cool under my trees. Come on, friends! "

  At night the crickets chirp in the woods.
  Who is it that slowly comes to my door and knocks softly?
  I hardly see the face, not a word is heard, the silence of heaven
      is above all.
  I cannot turn away my silent guest. I look through
      the darkness in his face and dream during the hours
      run away.




5


  I am peaceless. I am thirsty for distant things.
  My soul wanders longing to the edge of the dark expanse
      touch.
  O great beyond, o impetuous calling of your flute!
  I forget, I always forget that I don't have wings to fly
      have that I am chained to this piece of earth for all time.

  I am sleepless and full of longing, I am a stranger in a stranger
      Country.
  Your breath comes to me and whispers to me impossible hopes.
  Your language sounds familiar to my heart like his own.
  O aim in the distance, o impetuous calling of your flute!
  I forget, I always forget that I don't know the way, that I do
      the winged steed did not have.

  I'm restless, I'm a wanderer in my heart.
  In the sunny mist of the hesitant hours, what a mighty face of
      You will take shape in the blue of the sky!
  O farthest goal, o impetuous calling of your flute!
  I forget, I always forget that the doors are locked everywhere
      are in the house where I live lonely.




6th


  The tame bird was in a cage, the free bird was in the forest.
  When their time came they met; that's how it wanted it
      Fate.
  The free bird calls: "O dearest, let's fly to the forest."
  The bird in the cage chirps: “Come here, leave us in the cage together
      Life."
  Says the free bird: “Where is there space behind bars, its wings?
      to spread? "
  “Oh,” calls the bird in the cage, “where should I be in the air?
      rest without a pole? "

  The free bird calls: "My darling, sing the songs of the woods."
  The bird in the cage says: “Sit down with me, I want to teach you
      in the language of scholars. "
  The forest bird calls out: “No, oh no! Songs can never be taught
      become."
  The bird in the cage says: “Woe to me, I don't know the songs of the
      Forests. "

  Your love is hot, full of desire; but they can never swing
      Swing arm fly.
  They look through the bars of the cage and long in vain,
      to know each other.
  They flap their wings longingly and sing: "Come closer,
      my love! "
  The free bird calls out: “It doesn't work, I'm afraid the locked ones
      Doors of the cage. "
  The bird in the cage chirps: “Alas, my wings are powerless and
      dead."




7th


  O mother, the young prince must pass our door - how can he?
      do I think about my work this morning?
  Show me how to braid my hair; tell me what should i do for
      Put on clothes?
  Why are you looking at me so amazed, mother?
  I know very well that it will not be my window once
      look up; I know he'll be out of my sight in no time; just
      the fading flute-playing will reach me with a sigh
      far.
  But the young prince will pass our door, and I will
      wear my best for this moment

  O mother, the young prince passed our door, and she
      Morning sun flashed on his car.
  I brushed the veil from my face, tore the ruby ​​necklace off
      my neck and threw it in his way.
  Why are you looking at me so amazed, mother?
  I know well that he did not pick up my chain; I know she was
      crushed under the wheels and left a red trail in the dust
      back and no one knows what my gift was, or to whom it was meant.
  But the young prince passed our door, and I have
      thrown the jewelry from my chest on its path.




8th


  When the lamp on my bed went out, I woke up with the early ones
      Birds.
  I sat by the open window, a fresh wreath in my loose hair.
  The young wanderer came down the road in the rosy mist of the
      In the morning.
  He wore a pearl necklace around his neck, and the rays of the sun
      fell on top of his head.
  He stopped at my door and asked impetuously: "Where is she?"
  Out of sheer shame, I was unable to say: “'You' am me, young man
      Wanderer, I am 'she'. "

  It was dusk and the lamp wasn't lit.
  I thoughtlessly braided my hair.
  The young wanderer came in his wagon in the glow of the setting
      Sun.
  His horses foamed and dust lay on his dress.
  He got off at my door and asked in a tired voice: "Where is she?"
  Out of sheer shame, I was unable to say: “'I am' you ', more tired
      Wanderer, I am 'she'. "

  It's an April night. The lamp burns in my room.
  The breeze creeps in from the south. The noisy parrot
      sleeps in his cage.
  My bodice is the color of the peacock's throat, and my coat is
      green like young grass.
  I sit on the floor by the window and look out into the deserted one
      Road.
  Through the dark night I keep humming: "'You' am me,
      desperate wanderer, 'she' is me. "




9


  When I go to the rendezvous at night, no birds sing, the wind
      does not stir, the houses are on either side of the street
      silent.
  Only my own ankle braces get loud with every step, and so do I.
      ashamed of me.

  When I sit on my balcony and listen to his footsteps
      the leaves don't rustle on the trees, and the water is
      quiet in the river like the sword on the knees of a sleeping man
      Guardian.
  Only my own heart beats wildly - I don't know how to keep it quiet
      should hold.

  When my lover comes and sits with me, when my body trembles
      and my eyelids droop, the night turns black, the wind
      blows out the lamp and the clouds draw a veil over it
      Stars.
  Only the gem on my own chest shines and gives light. I
      don't know how to hide it.




10


  Leave your work, bride. Listen, the guest has come.
  Do you hear he's gently shaking the chain that holds the door?
  Make sure your ankle braces don't make too much noise, and that yours
      Step is not in too much of a hurry when you walk towards him.
  Leave your work, bride, the guest has come in the evening.

  No, it is not the haunted wind, bride, do not be afraid.
  It is a full moon and a spring night; the shadows in the courtyard are pale;
      above the sky is bright.
  Pull the veil over your face when you can't help it; wear
      the lamp to the door when you're scared.
  No, it is not the haunted wind, bride, do not be afraid.

  Do not speak to him if you are shy; resigns from
      the door when you meet him.
  If he asks you questions, you can, if you want, shut your eyes in silence
      reduce.
  Don't snap your bracelets when you lead him in, the lamp
      in the hand.
  Don't say a word to him if you're shy.

  Are you not done with your work, bride? Listen, the guest
      has come.
  Didn't you light the lamp in the cowshed?
  Have you not got the basket ready for the evening service?
  Didn't you put the red lucky symbol on your head and
      Directed you to the night?
  O bride, do you hear the guest has come?
  Leave your work!




11


  Come as you Are; do not hem in dressing.
  May your braided hair have come up too, your parting tangled
      and your bodice is not nested, do not pay attention to it.
  Come as you Are; do not hem in dressing.

  Take quick steps across the grass.
  When the red chalk leaves your feet because of the dew, when the
    Bell straps around your feet loosen when pearls come out of your
    Necklace fall, do not pay attention to it.
  Take quick steps across the grass.

  Do you see how the clouds are clustering in the sky?
  Flocks of cranes fly up from the far bank of the river, and suddenly
      Gusts of wind rush over the heather.
  The frightened cattle flee to the stables in the village.
  Do you see how the clouds are clustering in the sky?

  In vain do you light your lamp on the cleaning table - it flickers and
      goes out in the wind.
  Who can tell that you haven't put black on your eyelids?
      Your eyes are darker than rain clouds.
  In vain do you light your lamp on the cleaning table - it goes out.

  Come as you Are; do not hem in dressing.
  If the wreath for your hair is not yet tied, what do you do? if
      the chain around your wrist is not closed, let it be.
  The sky is covered with clouds - it's late.
  Come as you Are; do not hem in dressing.




12


  If you ever want to be hardworking and fill your mug - come, o
      come to my lake.
  The water will nestle around your feet and its secret
      blab out.
  The shadow of the coming rain lies over the sand, and the clouds
      hang low on the blue lines of the trees like the heavy
      Hair above your eyebrows.
  I know it well, the rhythm of your steps, my heart goes with it
      same rhythm.
  Come, come to my lake, if you have to fill your jug.

  If you want to be idle and sit thoughtlessly and open your mug
      let the water drift - come, oh come to my lake.
  The grassy slope is green and the wild flowers are innumerable.
  Your thoughts will wander out of your dark eyes like birds
      their nests.
  Your veil will fall on your feet.
  Come, come to my lake, if you want to sit idle.

  When you've played enough and want to dive into the water - come on, o
      come to my lake.
  Leave your blue coat on the bank; the blue water will take you
      cover and veil.
  The waves will stand on their toes to kiss your neck and
      To whisper in your ear.
  Come, come to my lake, if you want to dive into the water.

  If you have to throw yourself madly to your death - come, oh come to mine
      Lake.
  It is cool and unfathomable deep.
  It's dark like dreamless sleep.
  In its depths nights and days are one and songs are silences.
  Come, come to my lake, if you want to plunge into death.




13th


  I didn't ask for anything, just stood at the edge of the forest behind the tree.
  Longing was still in the twilight eyes and dew was in
      the air.
  The lazy scent of the damp grass hung over the earth in a thin mist.
  Under the fig tree I saw you milk the cow with your hands,
      tender and fresh like butter.
  And I stopped in silence.

  I didn't say a word. It was the bird that was invisible from the thicket
      sang.
  The mango tree shook its blossoms on the village lane, and bee around
      Bee hummed over.
  Over by the pond the gate of the Shiva temple stood open, and the
      Devotees had begun their chants.
  With the bucket in your lap, I saw you milk the cow.
  I was still standing with my empty can.

  I didn't get close to you.
  The sky awoke to the sound of the gong on the temple.
  The dust was blown up in the street from the hooves of the driven one
      Cattle.
  Women came from the river with jugs gurgling on their hips.
  Your bracelets clinked and the pitcher overflowed.
  The morning passed and I did not come close to you.




14th


  I wandered down the street, I don't know why, when noon
      was over and the bamboo branches rustled in the wind.
  The shadows fell to the ground, arms outstretched, clinging
      at the feet of the light rushing away.
  The Kokils had sung wearily.
  I wandered down the street I don't know why

  The hut by the water is shaded by an overhanging tree.
  One of them was busy at work, and the music came from the corner
      her arm rings.
  I stood in front of this hut, I don't know why.

  The narrow, winding path crosses some mustard fields and some
      Mango forest.
  It passes the village temple and the market by the
      Landing point of the river.
  I stopped at this hut, I don't know why.

  Years ago, on a windy March day - the whisper of the
      Spring was yearning and mango blossoms fell in the dust.
  The rippling water bounced and licked the brass pail that opened
      the landing stairs stood.
  I think of that windy March day; I do not know why.

  The shadows deepen and the cattle return home to their folds.
  The light is gray on the lonely meadows and the farmers are waiting
      the ferry on the shore.
  Slowly I go my way back, I don't know why.




15th


  I run like a muskrat runs in the shade of the forest, which is great
      of its own scent.
  The night is the night of the middle of May, the breeze is the breeze of the
      South.
  I lose my way and I wander; I am looking for what I am not
      and I achieve what I am not looking for.

  The image of my own longing rises and dances from my heart.
  The luminous appearance escapes.
  I try to hold onto it, it slips away from me and leads me astray.
  I seek what I cannot achieve, I achieve what I cannot
      search.




16


  Hands are entwined in hands, and eyes are hung on eyes: this is how it begins
      the story of our hearts.
  It is a moonlit March night; the air is filled with the sweet scent of the
      Henna flowers; my flute lies neglected on the earth, and
      Your wreath of flowers is unfinished.
  This love between you and me is just like a song.

  Your saffron colored veil makes my eyes drunk.
  The jasmine wreath that you woven for me shakes my heart like
      Praise.
  It is a game of give and failure, of unveiling and
      Re-hiding; a little smile and a little shyness and
      sweet, futile resistance.
  This love between you and me is just like a song.

  No secret beyond today; no struggle for the impossible;
      no shadow behind lust; no fumbling into the depths of the
      Dark.
  This love between you and me is just like a song.

  We do not wander from all words into eternal silence; we lift
      not put our hands in emptiness for things beyond hope.
  What we give and what we receive is enough for us.
  We did not squeeze joy to the last to get the
      To press the wine of sorrows.
  This love between you and me is just like a song.




17th


  The yellow bird sings on her tree and makes my heart leap
      Happiness.
  We both live in the same village and that is our whole joy.
  Your two favorite lambs come into the shade of our garden trees
      graze.
  If they get lost in our barley field, I carry them on mine
      Poor out.
  The name of our village is Khanjana, and they call ours Anjana
      Flow.
  The whole village knows my name, and her name is Ranjana.

  There is only ~ one ~ field between us.
  Bees that have their hives in our wood look for honey in theirs.
  Flowers thrown from their jetties come up the stream
      swam down in which we bathe.
  Baskets with dried Kusm flowers come from their fields on ours
      Market.
  The name of our village is Khanjana, and they call ours Anjana
      Flow.
  The whole village knows my name, and her name is Ranjana.

  The path that winds to her home is fragrant in spring
      Mango blossoms.
  When their linseed is ripe for harvest, the hemp blooms on us
      Field.
  The stars that smile on their hut send us the same
      winking look.
  The rain that floods their cistern makes our Kadam forest happy.
  The name of our village is Khanjana, and they call ours Anjana
      Flow.
  The whole village knows my name, and her name is Ranjana.




18th


  When the two sisters go to fetch water, they come to this one
      And they both smile.
  You must have noticed someone standing behind the trees so often
      they go fetch water.

  The two sisters whisper to each other when they are at this point
      passing.
  You must have guessed the secret from that someone who is behind
      stands by the trees as often as they go to fetch water.

  Your jugs suddenly lurch and spill water when you hit these
      Reach place.
  You must have found out that the heart beats of someone who
      stands behind the trees as often as they go to fetch water.

  The two sisters look at each other when they get here
      come and they smile.
  There's a laugh in her fast-paced feet, that
      Creates confusion in one's mind behind the trees
      stands as often as they go to fetch water.




19th


  You walked the river bank path with a full pitcher on your hip.
  Why did you turn your face quickly and look for me through the?
      fluttering veil?
  That bright look from the dark came over me like a breeze
      that sends a shiver through the rippling water and
      extends to the shady bank.
  He came to me like the bird of the evening that passed through the lightless
      Zimmer scurries from one open window to the other, and in that
      Night disappears.
  You are hidden like a star behind the hills and I am one
      Passerby on the street.
  But why did you stop for a moment and look into mine
      Face through your veil as you walked the path along the river bank
      with the full mug on your hip?




20th


  He comes and goes day after day.
  Go and give him a flower from my hair, my friend.
  If he asks who it was who sent them, please tell him
      not my name - because it just comes and goes.

  He is sitting in the dust under the tree.
  Make him a seat of flowers and leaves there, my friend.
  His eyes are sad and they bring sadness to my heart.
  He doesn't say what he's thinking about; he just comes and goes again.




21


  What drove him to come to my door, the wandering youth, than
      the day dawned?
  Whenever I go in and out, I pass him, and mine
      Eyes are caught in his face.
  I don't know if I should speak to him or keep quiet. What drove
      him to come to my door?

  The cloudy nights in July are dark; the sky is soft blue in the
      Autumn; the spring days are restless from the force of the south wind.
  He always weaves his songs in new ways.
  I turn away from my work and my eyes wet.
      What made him come to my door?




22nd


  As she passed me with quick steps, he touched me
      Hem of her dress.
  From the unknown island of a heart came a sudden, warm one
      Spring breath.
  The flutter of a fleeting touch brushed me and was in an instant
      like a torn petal blown by the wind.
  It fell on my heart like a sigh of her body and a whisper
      her soul.




23


  Why are you sitting there and clinking your bracelets, just for idleness
      Game?
  Fill your pitcher. It is time for you to come home.

  Why do you splash with your hands in the water and look from time to time
      out on the street after someone, just for idle play?
  Fill your mug and come home.

  The morning hours pass - the dark water flows on.
  The waves laugh and whisper to one another, just for idle play.

  The wandering clouds have gathered over the edge of the sky
      that ridge.
  They hesitate and look in your face and smile, only to idle
      Game.
  Fill your mug and come home.




24


  Do not keep it to yourself, the secret of your heart, my friend!
  Tell me, just me, in secret.
  You who smile so friendly, whisper softly, my heart will hear
      not my ears.

  The night is deep, the house is silent, the bird's nests are
      wrapped in sleep.
  Tell me with muted tears, with a trembling smile, in sweet shame
      and torment, the secret of your heart.




25th


  “Come to us, young man, sincerely say why madness in your eyes
      is? "
  “I don't know what wild poppy seed I drank from
      this is madness in my eyes. "
  "O shame!"
  “Yes, some are wise and some are foolish, some are vigilant and
      some carefree. There are eyes that smile and eyes that cry
      - and there is madness in my eyes. "

  "Young man, why are you standing so still in the shade of the tree?"
  “My feet are tired from the weight of my heart and I stand still
      in the shade. "
  "O shame!"
  “Yes, some go on their way and some hesitate, some are
      free and some tied up - and my feet are dull from it
      Load of my heart. "




26th


  “I will take what comes from your willing hands. Otherwise I ask for
      Nothing."
  "Yes, yes, I know you, humble beggar, you ask for everything,
      what one has. "

  “If you have a lost flower for me, I want it in
      carry my heart. "
  "But what if there are thorns on it?"
  "I want to endure it."
  "Yes, yes, I know you, humble beggar, you ask for everything,
      what one has. "

  “If you just lift your loving eyes to my face
      wanted it to sweeten my life beyond death. "
  "But what if they only had cruel looks?"
  "I want to let them pierce my heart."
  "Yes, yes, I know you, humble beggar, you ask for everything,
      what one has. "




27


  “Trust love, even if it brings suffering. Don't close your heart
      to."
  “Oh no, friend, your words are dark, I can't
      understand. "

  "The heart is only there to be given away with a tear and a song,
      Lover."
  “Oh no, friend, your words are dark, I can't
      understand. "

  “Lust is ephemeral like a drop of dew; while she laughs, dies
      She already. But suffering is strong and enduring. Leave sorrowful love
      keep watch in your eyes. "
  “Oh no, friend, your words are dark, I can't
      understand. "

  “The lotus blooms when looking at the sun and loses everything it has.
      He doesn't want to keep his buds in eternal winter fog. "
  “Oh no, friend, your words are dark, I can't
      understand. "




28


  Your questioning eyes are sad. You seek my meaning too
      explore how the moon wants to fathom the sea.
  I have spread my life from end to end right before your eyes
      End and nothing hidden or held back. That's why you know
      not me.
  If it were just a gem, I could cut it into a hundred pieces
      break and string them in a chain to close your neck with it
      decorate.
  If it were just a flower, fresh and small and sweet, I could
      pluck it from the stalk and stick it in your hair.
  But it is a heart, beloved. Where are its banks and its bottom?
  You do not know the limits of this kingdom and yet you are its
      Queen.
  If it were just a moment of pleasure, it would be in one
      light smiles bloom, and you could do it at a glance
      see and read.
  If it were just a pain, it would melt in bright tears
      reflecting his innermost secret without a word.
  But it is love, my beloved.
  His lust and pain are without limits, and his claims and endless
      his wealth.
  It is as close to you as your life, and yet you can never quite be
      know.




29


  Speak to me, beloved! Tell me in words what you sang
  The night is dark. The stars have lost themselves behind clouds.
      The wind sighs through the leaves.
  I want to loosen my hair. My blue coat will hug me like
      Night. I want to press your head to my breast; and here in the
      sweet loneliness let your heart speak. I want my eyes
      close and listen. I don't want to look into your face.
  When your words are over, we want to sit in silence.
      Only the trees will whisper in the dark.
  The night will pale. The day will dawn. We will be in each other
      the eyes look and each go his own way.
  Speak to me, beloved! Tell me in words what you sang




30th


  You are the evening cloud that drifts in the sky of my dreams.
  I give you color and shape with the wishes of my love.
  You are my own, my own, you, the ones in my endless dreams
      lives!

  Your feet are rosy red from the glow of my longing heart,
      You, gleaner of my evening songs!
  Your lips are bittersweet because they tasted mine
      Chalice of Passion.
  You are my own, my own, you, picture of my lonely dreams!

  With the shadow of my passion I darkened your eyes
      as they dipped into my gaze.
  I caught you and wound you up, beloved, in the web
      my music.
  You are my own, my own, you who are in my immortals
      Dream lives!




31


  My heart, the bird of the wild, has its sky in your eyes
      found.
  You are the cradle of the morning, you are the kingdom of the stars.
  My songs are lost in their depths.
  Just let me fly up in this sky, in its lonely one
      Immensity.
  Just let me part his clouds and spread my wings in his
      Sunshine.




32


  Tell me if this is all true love, tell me if this is all true
      is.
  When these eyes spray their lightning bolts, the dark clouds give in
      Your chest's stormy answer?
  Is it true that my lips are sweet like the bud that pops open?
      the first, admitted love?
  Do the memories of vanished May moons line my limbs?
  The earth shudders like a harp in songs when my feet they
      touch?
  Is it true that the drops of dew fall from the eyes of the night
      when I show myself and that the morning light is happy when it does
      envelops my body all around?
  Is it true, is it true that your love has been lonely through ages and
      Wandered worlds in search of me?
  That, when you finally found me, your long yearning for ultimate peace
      found in my gentle speech, in my eyes and lips and
      flowing hair?
  Is it true that the secret of the infinite is on this mine
      small forehead is written?
  Tell me, beloved, is this all true?




33


  I love you beloved Forgive me my love
  Like a bird that loses its way, I am trapped.
  As my heart was shaken, it lost its veil and became
      naked. Cover it up with pity, love, and forgive me mine
      Love.

  If you cannot love me, beloved, forgive me my pain.
  Don't look at me disdainfully from afar.
  I want to steal back to my corner and sit in the dark.
  I want to cover my naked shame with both hands.
  Turn your face from me, beloved, and forgive me my pain.

  If you love me, beloved, forgive me my joy.
  When the flood of happiness carries my heart away, don't smile
      about my dangerous remoteness.
  When I sit on my throne and rule over you with the
      Tyranny of my love when I like a goddess give you my favor
      grant, bear my pride, beloved, and forgive me mine
      Joy.




34


  Do not go, beloved, without saying goodbye to me.
  I've been awake all night and now my eyes are heavy
      of sleep.
  I'm just afraid I'll lose you when I sleep.
  Do not go, beloved, without saying goodbye to me.

  I start up and stretch out my hands to touch you. I ask
      me: "Is it a dream?"
  I could spell your feet with my heart and tie them up
      my breast!
  Do not go, beloved, without saying goodbye to me.




35


  You play with me so that I don't recognize you too easily.
  You blind me with the flashes of your laughter to close your tears
      hide.
  I know, I know your ruse;
  You never say the word you want to say.

  So that I do not recognize your worth, you escape me for a thousand
      Because of.
  So that I don't mix you up with the crowd, you stand apart.
  I know, I know your ruse;
  You never go the way you want to go.

  You have more demands than the others, that's why you are silent.
  You avoid my gifts with mock indifference.
  I know, I know your ruse;
  You never want to take what you want to take.




36


  He whispered: "Dearest, open your eyes."
  I scolded him hard and said: "Go!" but he didn't move.
  He stood in front of me and held both of my hands. I said: "Leave me alone!"
      but he didn't go.

  He tilted his face to my ear. I looked at him and said:
      "Shame on you!"; but he didn't care.
  His lips touched my cheek. I shivered and said, “You dare
      too much"; but he was not ashamed.

  He put a flower in my hair. I said: “It doesn't help!”;
      but he remained unmoved.
  He took the wreath from my neck and walked away. I cry and
      ask my heart: "Why doesn't he come back?"




37


  Would you put your wreath of fresh flowers around my neck
      Lovely?
  But you must know that the wreath that ~ I ~ made for them
      Many is; for those who pass by, who are in
      dwell in unexplored lands or live in poets' songs.

  It's too late to ask my heart in exchange for yours.
  There was a time when my life was like a bud; all its scent lay
      stored in their core.
  Now it is wasted in all directions.
  Who knows the spell that can collect it and lock it back in?
  My heart is not mine to give to only one; it is that
      Given to many.




38


  Dearest, a long time ago your poet devised a great one
      Poem.
  Alas, I wasn't paying attention, and it struck your ringing bell
      Ankle braces and was damaged.
  It broke into little songs and was scattered at your feet.
  My whole shipload of stories from ancient wars was gone
      shaken by the laughing waves and in tears
      soaked and sank.
  You must make up for this loss for me, dearest.
  When my claims to immortal fame are destroyed after death
      make me immortal as long as I live.
  And I don't want to mourn my loss, nor blame you.




39


  I try to wind a wreath all morning, but this one
      Flowers slip away from me and fall out.
  You sit there and secretly watch me from the corners of yours
      peeking eyes.
  Ask these eyes, from whose darkness the willfulness flashes, who is there
      is to blame.

  I try to sing a song, but to no avail.
  A furtive smile trembles on your lips; ask why
      my song failed.
  Let your smiling lips say under oath, as my voice is in
      Silence lost like a drunken bee in the lotus.
  It is evening and time for the flowers to close their goblets.
  Let me sit by your side and let my lips do the work
      which can be done in silence and in the soft light of
      Stars.




40


  An incredulous smile flits across your face when I come to you
      come to say goodbye.
  I've done it so often that you think I'll be back soon.
  To admit to you, I feel the same doubt.
  Because the spring days come back in their time; the full moon is taking
      Farewell and come back for a new visitor; the blossoms are coming
      again and blush on their branches year after year, and maybe
      I also only say goodbye to you to come back.
  But cherish the illusion for a while; don't send it away
      unkind haste.
  If I say I will leave you forever, take it for granted and leave
      a mist of tears for a moment the dark edge
      Deepen your eyes.
  Then smile as mischievously as you want when I come back.




41


  I long to speak the deepest words that I can tell you
      have; but I don't dare for fear you might laugh.
  That's why I laugh at myself and tell my secret in jest.
  I take my pain lightly for fear you might do it.

  I long to speak to you the most faithful words I can to you
      have to say; but I don't dare, for fear you might
      not to believe.
  That's why I disguise them in falsehood and say the opposite of
      what I mean.
  I mock my pain for fear you might do it.

  I long to use the most precious words I have for you
      have; but I don't dare, for fear it might not come with me
      be paid back with the same coin.
  That's why I give you ugly names and brag about my strict severity.
  I hurt you for fear you would never know what suffering is.

  I long to sit with you in silence; but i dare not
      otherwise my heart would leap on my lips.
  That is why I chat and chat lightly and hide my heart
      behind words.
  I grasp my suffering roughly, for fear that you might do it.

  I long to leave your side; but i dare not
      for fear that my cowardice would be revealed to you.
  That's why I carry my head up and come into yours cheerfully
      Society.
  Incessant dagger stabs from your eyes always hold my wound
      open.




42


  You great, wonderful drunkard!
  When you push open your doors and play the fool in front of the crowd;
  If you empty your bag in one night and calm down
      Cheat;
  When you walk strange paths and play with useless things;
  Don't bother about rhyme and law!
  When you tension your sails before the storm and the rudder in two
      breaks,
  Then I want to follow you, comrade, and want to drunk into the abyss
      drive.

  I've wasted my days and nights soberly in society
      wise neighbor.
  Knowing a lot has made my hair gray and watching my eyes a lot
      cloudy.
  For years I have collected and piled chunks and scraps of things:
  Crush them and dance on them and throw them all to the wind.
  Because I know this is the highest wisdom, drunk into the abyss too
      drive.

  Let all crooked doubts vanish, let me hopelessly my way
      to lose.
  Let a wild swirling storm come and sweep me away from mine
      Anchor.
  The world is populated with dignitaries and workers, useful and
      clever.
  There are people who are easily the first and those who
      get behind modestly.
  Let them be happy and successful and leave me foolishly useless
      be.
  Because I know it's the end of all work, drunk into the abyss
      to drive.

  This minute I swear all rights to the honorable and
      Decent to count.
  I let go of my pride in knowledge and judgment about good and bad.
  I want to break the vessel of memory, the last
      Teardrop v .
  I want to bathe my laughter in the foam of the red sparkling wine and again
      make young.
  I want to break the shield of the sedate citizen into pieces.
  I want to take the sacred vow to throw away all dignity and get drunk
      to drive into the abyss.




43


  No, friends, I will never become a hermit, say what you will.
  I will never become a hermit if she does not take the vow with me
      drops.
  It's my firm decision if I don't have a shady shelter and
      can find no mate for my repentance, I never will
      Hermit.

  No, friends, I will never leave the hearth and home and myself
      retreat to the solitude of the forest, if not happy laughter
      echoes from its shadow and not the hem of one
      Saffron coat flutters in the wind; if his silence doesn't go through
      low whispers grows deeper.
  I will never become a hermit.




44


  Venerable Father, forgive this pair of sinners. Spring winds blow today
      in wild eddies, dust and dead leaves drift away, and with them
      they have lost all of your teachings.
  Don't say, father, that life is vanity.
  Because today we two once signed a truce with the
      Death, and only for a few fragrant hours we are both
      become immortal.

  Even if the king's army came and attacked us fiercely, we would
      Shake your head sadly and say: Brothers, you disturb us. If
      you must have this noisy game, go and leave your weapons where
      clink differently. We are only there for a few fleeting moments
      become immortal.

  If friendly people came and gathered around us, we would be deep
      Bow down to him and say: This tremendously great happiness is confusing
      us. The space is barren in the infinite sky in which we
      dwell. Because in spring the flowers come in abundance and the
      busy wings of bees butt each other. Our little
      Heaven, in which only the two immortals live, is far too narrow.




45


  I wish the guests who have to leave a good trip and clear all traces
      their kicks away.
  With a smile, press against your chest what is gentle and simple and close.
  Today is the festival of the spirits who do not know when they will die.
  Let your laughter be shimmering lust like glittering light
      trickling waves.
  Let your life dance lightly on the edge of time like that
      Dew drops on the edge of the leaf.
  Strike in the chords of your harp the rhythms that the moment gives you
      enters.




46


  You left me and went your way.
  I thought I would mourn you and your lonely image
      set up in my heart, worked into a golden song.
  But oh, my bad fortune! the time is short.

  Youth disappears year after year; the spring days are fleeting; a
      Nothing makes the delicate flowers die, and the wise one admonishes me
      that life is but a drop of dew on a lotus leaf.
  Should I miss all of this to stare at that one who is mine
      has turned his back?
  That would be simple-minded and foolish; because the time is short.

  Come then, you my rainy nights with splashing feet; smile,
      my golden autumn; come, carefree April, sprinkle your kisses
      over land.
  Come on, and you and you too!
  Dear ones, you know we are mortals. Is it wise to yourself that
      To break heart for the one who takes her heart away? Because the time
      is short.

  It's cute to sit in a corner to ponder and rhyme
      proclaim that you are my whole world.
  It is heroic to cherish and fondle one's suffering and
      to be determined not to be comforted.
  But a fresh, young face looks in to my door and
      raises his eyes to my eyes.
  I can't help but wipe away my tears and be the wise one
      change my song
  Because time is short.




47


  If you want it to be like that, I want to stop my singing.
  If it brings trouble to your heart, I want to avert my eyes
      from your face.
  If you are suddenly frightened on your walk, I want to move to the side
      step and take another path.
  If you get confused while curling flowers, I want your lonely
      Avoid the garden.
  If it makes the water wanton and wild, I don't want my boat
      Row past your bank.




48


  Free me from the bonds of your sweetness, dear! Nothing more of this
      Wine of kisses.
  This mist of heavy incense suffocates my heart.
  Open the doors, make way for the morning light.
  I am lost in you, caught in the hugs of yours
      Tenderness.
  Free me from your magic and give me courage back, you mine
      to offer a liberated heart.




49


  I hold her hands and press them to my chest.
  I try to fill my arms with her loveliness, her sweet one
      To plunder smiles with kisses, their dark looks with mine
      Eyes to drink.
  But, oh, where is it all? Who can force its blue from the sky?
  I try to grasp the beauty; she escapes from me and just leaves
      the body back in my hands.
  I come home cheated and tired.
  How can the body touch the flower that only touch the soul
      should?




50


  Beloved, my heart yearns to meet with me day and night
      You - an encounter that is like all-devouring death.
  Sweep me away like a storm; take all that i have; break in
      my sleep and plunder my dreams. Rob me of my world.
  In this devastation, in the ultimate nakedness of the soul, let us be one
      be in beauty.

  Ah, longing in vain! Where is this hope of union except?
      in you, my god?




51


  Then finish the last song and let's part.
  Forget that night when the night is up
  Whom am I trying to embrace with my arms? You can't dream
      capture.
  My longing hands press emptiness to my heart and crush it
      my chest.




52


  Why did the lamp go out?
  I put my coat over it to protect her from the wind
      that's why the lamp has gone out.

  Why did the flower wither?
  I pressed it to my heart with caring love, that's why the flower is
      wilted.

  Why did the stream dry up?
  I drew a dam through it to have it all to myself, that's why
      the stream dried up.

  Why did the harp string break?
  I wanted to force a tone that was beyond her strength, that's why she is
      Harp string broken.




53


  Why do you make me blush by one look?
  I did not come as a beggar.
  For only a fleeting hour I stood at the end of your court
      beyond the hedge.
  Why do you make me blush by one look?

  I did not take a rose from your garden, nor did I pick a fruit
      I.
  I stepped modestly under the protective trees by the path where everyone
      strange wanderers are allowed to stand.
  I didn't pick a rose.

  Yes, my feet were tired and the rain poured down.
  The winds howled through the swaying bamboo branches.
  The clouds raced across the sky as if they were on the run
      the conqueror.
  My feet were tired.

  I don't know what you thought of me or who you thought of at your door
      waiting.
  Flashes of lightning blinded your peeking eyes.
  How could I know that you could see me where I am
      Was it in the dark?
  I don't know what you thought of me

  The day is over and the rain has stopped for a while.
  I leave the protection of the tree on the edge of your garden and this one
      Sit in the grass.
  It's gotten dark; close your door; I go my way
  The day is over.




54


  Where do you rush your basket so late in the evening, where the market passes?
      is?
  They have all come home with their burdens; the moon peeps through them
      Village trees.
  The echo of the voices calling for the ferry runs across the dark
      Water to the distant swamp where wild ducks sleep.
  Where are you rushing your basket when the market is over?

  Sleep has put its fingers on the eyes of the earth.
  The crows' nests have become silent, and the murmur of the
      Bamboo leaves have fallen silent.
  The workers have come home from their fields and are spreading theirs
      Mats in the yards.
  Where are you rushing your basket when the market is over?




55


  It was noon when you left.
  The sun was hot in the sky.
  I had done my job and sat alone on my balcony when you
      went away.
  Every now and then a gentle gust of wind came up and fanned me the scent
      from many distant fields too.
  The pigeons cooed tirelessly in the shade, and a bee lost its way
      himself in my room and hummed the news from far away
      Fields.

  The village slept in the midday heat. The road was deserted.
  At times a rustling suddenly rose in the leaves and died
      again.
  I stared up at the sky and wove a name's letter I
      knew, into the blue, while the village slept in the midday heat.

  I forgot to braid my hair. The faint breeze played
      with it on my cheek.
  The river glided smoothly along the shady bank.
  The lazy white clouds did not move.
  I forgot to braid my hair.

  It was noon when you left.
  The dust of the road was hot and the fields were thin.
  The pigeons cooed in the thick leaves.
  I was alone on my balcony when you left.




56


  I was one of the many women who day in and day out with the
      inconspicuous household chores are employed.
  Why did you choose me and brought me from the cool shelter of ours
      ordinary life?

  Unacknowledged love is sacred. It shines like a gem in the
      Glow of the hidden heart. In the light of the curious day
      she looks sadly gloomy.
  Oh, you broke the shell of my heart and tore mine
      trembling love into the open space and forever destroyed
      the shady corner where she had her nest.

  The other women have stayed the same.
  Nobody has looked into your innermost being, and you know yourself
      not own secret.
  They smile and cry easily, chat and work. Go daily
      they go to the temple, light their lamps, and fetch water from the temple
      Flow.

  I hoped my love would be spared the shivering
      Shame on the homeless but you turn your face away
  Yes, your path is open to you, but for me you have the return
      cut off and left me stark naked before the world,
      staring at me with her lidless eyes night and day.




57


  I picked your flower, oh world!
  I pressed her to my heart and the thorn pricked.
  As the day passed and it got dark I found the flower withered
      was, but the pain remained.

  More flowers will come to you with fragrance and pride, O world!
  But my time to pick flowers is over and the dark night
      I don't have my rose for long, only the pain remains.




58


  One morning in the flower garden a blind girl came over to give me one
      To offer a flower chain in the envelope of a lotus leaf.
  I put the flower chain around my neck and tears came into me
      the eyes.
  I kissed her and said, “You are blind just like the flowers.
  "You don't know yourself how beautiful your gift is."




59


  O woman, you are not only God's creature, but He too
      People; they equip you with beauty from their hearts.
  Poets weave a fabric for you from threads of golden fantasy; painter
      always give your figure new immortality.
  The sea gives its pearls, the mines their gold, the summer gardens theirs
      Flowers to wrap you up, to cover you, to make you more precious
      do.
  The desire of men's hearts has its luster over your youth
      spread.
  You are half woman and half dream.




60


  In the midst of the hustle and bustle of life, O beauty in stone
      cut, you stand silent and still, alone and apart.
  The spirit of time sits enchanted at your feet and whispers:
  “Speak, speak to me, my beloved; speak, my bride! "
  But your speech is locked in the stone, oh immovable one
      Beauty!




61


  Silence, my heart, let the moment of parting be sweet.
  Let it not be death, but consummation.
  Let love melt into memory and pain melt into songs.
  Let the flight through the sky end in the folds of wings over the nest.
  Let the last touch of your hands be gentle like the flower of
      Night.
  Stand still, oh wonderful end, for a moment and say yours
      last words in silence.
  I lean in front of you and hold my lamp up to help you
      To shine your way.




62


  I walked the twilight path of a dream to look for my loved one,
      that was mine in a previous life.

  Her house was at the end of a deserted street.
  In the evening breeze, her favorite peacock sat sleepy on the pole, and she
      Pigeons were silent in their corner.

  She put her lamp down at the gate and stood in front of me.
  She raised her big eyes to my face and asked silently: “It’s okay
      Are you okay, my friend? "
  I tried to answer, but our language was lost
      and forget.

  I thought and thought; our names would not come to my mind.
  Tears shimmered in her eyes. She held out her right hand to me
      opposite. I took it and stood in silence.

  Our lamp flickered in the evening wind and went out.




63


  Wanderer, do you have to go?
  The night is quiet and darkness falls over the forest.
  The lamps are bright on our balcony, the flowers are all fresh, and
      the young eyes still awake.
  Has the time come for your parting?
  Wanderer, do you have to go?

  We have not tied your feet with our pleading arms.
  Your doors are open Your horse is saddled at the gate.
  If we tried to stifle your path, it was only ours
      Songs.
  Have we ever tried to hold you back, it was only ours
      Eyes.
  Wanderer, we're passed out to hold you We only have ours
      Tears.

  What inextinguishable fire glows in your eyes?
  What restless fever rushes through your blood?
  Which call from the dark compels you?
  What a terrible magic formula you have in the stars in the sky
      read that the night with a sealed, secret message in
      Your heart kicked, silent and strange?

  If you don't care about happy feasts, if you have peace
      must, weary heart, we shall extinguish our lamps and ours
      Let the harp be silent.
  We'll sit quietly in the dark in the whisper of the leaves, and the
      tired moon will pour pale rays on your window.
  O wanderer, what a sleepless spirit has got from the heart of midnight
      Touched you




64


  I spent my day in the scorching dust of the street.
  Well, in the cool of the evening, I knock on the door of the tavern. you
      is abandoned and disintegrated.
  An old, crippled Ashath tree stretches out its hungry grasping
      Roots through the gaping cracks in the walls.

  There was a time when hikers stopped here to shut their tired feet
      to wash.
  They spread their mats in the yard in the dim light of the early moon
      and sat and talked about foreign lands.
  They woke up refreshed in the morning to the chirping of birds
      made happy and friendly flowers nodded to them from the road.

  But no lighted lamp was waiting for me when I came here.
  The black stains of smoke from many a forgotten evening lamp stare
      like blind eyes from the wall.
  Fireflies buzz in the bush by the dried up pond, and
      Bamboo branches cast their shadows on the grass-covered path.
  I'm nobody's guest at the end of my day.
  The long night is ahead of me and I am tired.




65


  Is it you again who calls?
  The evening has come. The tiredness embraces me like arms
      pleading love.
  Are you calling me

  I had given you my whole day, cruel mistress, you must me
      rob my night too?
  Everything has its end somewhere and the loneliness of the dark is ours
      self.
  Must your voice arrow cut it and hit me fatally?

  Doesn't the evening sing you a slumber song under your window?
  Do the stars with their silent wings never rise to that
      mercilessly dark sky over your castle?
  Do the flowers in your garden never sink into the dust too gentle
      Deaths?

  Do you have to call me, you restless one?
  Then let the sad eyes of love wake up and weep in vain.
  Let the lamp burn in the lonely house.
  Let the ferry boat carry the weary workers home.
  I tear myself free from my dreams and hurriedly follow your call.




66


  A wandering fool was looking for the philosopher's stone. His hair was
      disheveled, bleached by the sun and covered with dust, his body
      emaciated to a shadow, his lips pressed tightly together as if
      the closed doors of his heart, his burning eyes
      like the light of a glowworm looking for its playmates.

  The endless ocean roared before him.
  The chatty waves chattered incessantly from hidden ones
      Appreciating, mocking the foolishness that did not know what they were
      meant.
  It may be that there was no hope left now, and yet
      he didn't want to rest, because the search had become his life,
  How the ocean always raises its arms to the sky after
      Unreachable -
  How the stars walk in circles and yet seek a goal that
      is unreachable -
  So also the fool wandered with dusty and bleached hair
      lonely shores, in search of the philosopher's stone.

  One day a village boy came up to him and asked: “Tell me where you've got
      Do you put the golden chain around your body? "
  The fool stopped - the chain that was once iron was real
      Gold; it wasn't a dream, but he didn't know when to turn
      had transformed.
  He hit his forehead wildly - where, oh where, he had without closing it
      know, finally succeeded?
  He had become used to picking up pebbles, the chain with it
      touching and throwing the stones away without paying attention to whether
      she would have changed; so the fool found and lost the stone
      the wise.
  The sun was setting low in the west and the sky was golden.
  The fool went back on his own trail to try again
      looking for lost treasure, with exhausted strength, the body
      bowed, and the heart in the dust like an uprooted tree.




67


  Whether the evening comes with slow steps, and all the songs that
      Has given signs to silence;
  Whether your companions have also retired and you are tired;
  Whether fear also broods in the dark, and the face of heaven
      is veiled;
  Still, bird, my bird, listen to me, do not lose your wings
      sink.

  It is not the shimmer of the leaves in the forest, it is the sea that
      swells like a creepy black snake.
  This is not the dance of the blooming jasmine, it is the spray that blows
      Foam.
  Oh, where is the sunny green bank, where is your nest?
  Bird, my bird, listen to me, don't let your wings sink.

  The lonely night lies over your path, the twilight sleeps behind
      the shady hills.
  The stars hold their breath and count the hours, the pale moon
      floods the deep night.
  Bird, my bird, listen to me, don't let your wings sink.

  There is no hope, no fear for you.
  There is no word, no whisper, no scream.
  There is no home, no resting place.
  There is only your own pair of wings and the pathless sky.
  Bird, my bird, listen to me, don't let your wings sink.




68


  Nobody lives forever, brother, and nothing lasts long. Hold that in
    Sense and rejoice.
  Our life is more than the one refrain, our path is more than
      its a long journey.
  The music of the world is more than an old song of the one
      Poet.
  The flower wilts and dies; but whoever bears the flower does not have to last forever
      mourn for them.
  Brother, keep this in mind and rejoice.

  There must be perfect silence so that all tones can reach perfect harmony
      weave.
  Life leans its sunset to turn into golden shadows
      to sink in.
  Love must be withdrawn from its game in order to cost and to suffer
      Heaven of tears to be borne.
  Brother, keep this in mind and rejoice.

  We hurry to pick our flowers, otherwise they will be looted by
      the hurrying winds.
  Our pulses beat faster and our eyes shine when we
      To catch kisses that vanish from us when we lined up.
  Our life is full of desire, our desires are impetuous because the
      Time rings the bell of separation.
  Brother, keep this in mind and rejoice.

  We don't have time to reach for a thing and then to do it
      crush and throw in the dust.
  The hours hurry by with a light step, their dreams in the folds
      hiding her robe.
  Our life is short; only a few days it allows love.
  If we did it with arduous work, it would be endlessly long.
  Brother, keep this in mind and rejoice.

  Beauty is sweet to us because it dances to the same fleeting
      Way like our life.
  Knowledge is precious to us because we will never have time to
      complete.
  Everything is done and completed in eternal heaven.
  But the flowers of deception that spring from this earth lasts forever
      fresh death.
  Brother, keep this in mind and rejoice.




69


  I hunt for the golden stag.
  You may smile, friends, but I haunt the illusion that holds me
      fools.
  I run over hills and valleys, I wander through nameless lands
      because I hunt for the golden stag.
  You come and buy in the market and return home laden with goods,
      but the magic of the homeless winds touched me, I know
      not where and when.
  I have no care in my heart; I left all my belongings far
      behind me.
  I run over hills and valleys, I wander through nameless lands -
      because I chase after the golden stag.




70


  I think back to a day in my childhood when I let in
      Paper boats float in the ditch.
  It was a damp July day; I was alone and happy with mine
      Game.
  I let my paper boat float in the ditch.

  Suddenly the storm clouds gathered, winds came in gusts, and that
      Rain poured down in torrents.
  Streams of dirty water tumbled and swelled the river and
      let my ship sink.
  I thought bitterly in my mind that the storm was just about it
      be to destroy my happiness; all his wickedness was against me.

  The cloudy July day lasts a long time today, and I've pondered all of them
      the games of life in which I was a loser.
  I switch my fate for the many pranks it played on me
      when I suddenly had to think of the little paper boat that im
      Digging sank.




71


  The day is not over yet, the fair is not over, the fair
      at the riverbank.
  I feared my time would be wasted, my last
      Penny wasted.
  But no, brother, I still have something left. My fate has
      not bruised me about anything.

  The buying and selling is over.
  Everyone has his or her own and it's time for me to go home.
  But, goalkeeper, are you taking your toll?
  Fear not, I still have something left. My destiny
      didn't cheat me about anything.

  The calm in the wind threatens a storm, the low-moving clouds in the west
      do not bode well.
  The silent water waits for the wind.
  I hurry to cross the river before the night overtakes me.
  Ferryman, you want your wages!
  Yes, brother, I still have something left. My fate has me
      not bruised about anything.

  The beggar sits by the wayside under the tree. Oh, he looks into mine
      Face with faint hope!
  He thinks I am rich from the day’s earnings.
  Yes, brother, I still have something left. My fate has me
      not bruised about anything.

  The night turns black and the street becomes lonely. Fireflies glow in the
      Leaves.
  Who are you who follows me with secretly quiet steps?
  Oh, I know you want to rob me of all of my profits. I want you
      don't disappoint!
  Because I still have something left. My fate did not concern me
      bruised everything.

  I'll get to my home at midnight. My hands are empty.
  You wait for me with fearful eyes at my door, sleepless
      and in silence.
  Like a fearful bird you fly violently to my chest
      Love.
  Yes, yes, my God, I still have a lot left. My fate has
      not bruised me about anything.




72


  In days of hard work, I built a temple. He had neither
      Doors and windows, its walls were wide and solid
      Cuboids.
  I forgot everything else, I avoided everyone, I stared up in delight
      the picture that I had put on the altar.
  It was always night inside, lit by lamps with scented oil
      was.
  The endless incense surrounded my heart with its heavy rings.
  Sleeplessly I cut fantastic figures into the walls
      labyrinthine lines - winged horses, flowers with
      human faces, women with limbs like snakes.
  Nowhere was an entrance left through which the song of the birds, that
      The murmur of leaves or the hum of the busy village
      could come in.
  The only sound that echoed from the dark dome was that
      Incantations that I sang.
  My mind became sharp and immobile like a jet of flame, the senses
      disappeared in rapture.
  I didn't know how time passed before the thunderbolt hit the temple
      hit and sudden pain pierced my heart.

  The lamp looked pale and ashamed; the carvings on the walls
      stared like bound dreams with confused looks into the light,
      as if they wanted to hide.
  I looked at the picture on the altar. I saw it smile and live through it
      God's invigorating breath. Had the night that I held prisoner
      her wings spread and was gone.




73


  Infinite wealth is not yours, my patient and sad ones
      Mother Earth!
  You struggle to feed your children's mouths, but they do
      Food is sparse.
  The gift of joy you have for us is never perfect.
  The toys you make for your children are fragile.
  You cannot satisfy all of our hungry hopes, but you should
      is that why I leave you?
  Your smile, overshadowed by pain, is sweet to my eyes.
  Your love, which knows no fulfillment, is dear to my heart.
  You have nourished us with life from your breast, but not with
      Immortality, that's why your eyes are always sleepless.
  You have been working with color and song for ages, and yet it is yours
      Heaven not yet built, just a vague idea of ​​it.
  The mist of tears hangs over your creations of beauty.
  I want to pour my songs into your mute heart and my love into
      Your love.
  I want to adore you with work.
  I have seen your tender face and I love your sad one
      Dust, mother earth.




74


  In the reception hall of the world the simple blade of grass sits on it
      Carpet with the sunbeam and the stars of midnight.
  So my songs share their places in the heart of the world with music
      of clouds and forests.
  But you, rich man, your wealth has none of the simple
      Greatness of the happy sun gold and the mild, meditative one
      Moon shimmer.
  The blessing of the all-embracing Heaven is not poured out on it.
  And when death appears, it bleaches and withers and falls apart into
      Dust.




75


  At midnight he said to his heart:
  “Now is the time to give up my home and seek God. Oh who
      has kept me mad here for so long? "
  God whispered, "I," but the man's ears were closed.
  His wife lay peacefully with the slumbering child at her breast
      asleep, next to him on the bed.
  The man said, "Who are you who have fooled me for so long?"
  The voice said again, "These are God," but he did not hear it.
  The child cried out in a dream and snuggled close to the mother.
  God commanded: "Stop, you fool, do not leave your home", but still
      he didn't hear.
  God sighed and said sadly, “Why does my servant leave me when
      he goes looking for me? "




76


  The fair was in front of the temple. It had rained from early morning
      and the day was drawing to a close.
  Lights than all the happiness of the crowd was the bright smile of one
      Girl who bought a palm pipe for a penny.
  The shrill joy of this pipe floated above all laughter and noise.

  An endless procession of people came and pushed. The street was
      muddy, the river rising, the fields under water in
      incessant rain.
  Greater than all the troubles of the crowd was the grief of a little one
      Boys - he didn't have a penny to buy a brightly colored stick
      to buy.
  His serious eyes, which stared longingly at the store, made
      all this crowd so pitiful.




77


  The worker and his wife from the west are busy making bricks
      prick for the kiln.
  Her little daughter goes to the landing site on the river; there has no
      End with scrubbing and scrubbing pots and pans.
  Her little brother, with his head shaved and brown, naked, limbs
      Splattered with excrement, follows behind and waits patiently on the high bank
      on their instruction.
  She goes home again with the full jar free on her head
      flashing brass pot in the left, the child on the right -
      she, her mother's little servant, earnest from the burden of
      domestic worries.

  One day I saw this naked boy with his legs outstretched
      to sit.
  His sister sat in the water and rubbed a handful of earth
      Drinking vessel and turned it over and over.
  Nearby, a fluffy lamb grazed along the bank.
  It came very close to where the boy was sitting and suddenly bleated loudly, and
      the child started and screamed.
  His sister stopped cleaning the pot and ran over there.
  She took her brother in one arm and the lamb in the other and
      shared her caresses between them both, with ~ a ~ band of
      Love uniting the offspring of animals and humans.




78


  It was May. The sultry noon seemed endlessly long. The arid earth
      languished with thirst in the heat.
  Then I heard a voice calling from the river: "Come on, darling!"
  I closed my book and opened the window to look out.
  I saw a big buffalo, its fur soiled, with peaceful,
      patient eyes standing by the river; and a boy, knee-deep in the
      Water, called him to the sink.
  I smiled thoughtfully, and a touch of sweet peace touched my heart.




79


  I often ask myself where the boundaries of knowledge lie hidden between
      Man and animal, whose heart knows no spoken language.
  Through which primal paradise ran on a distant morning of creation
      simple path where their hearts met?
  Those traces often trodden have not yet been erased, even if theirs
      Kinship is forgotten.
  But suddenly the dark awakens to some wordless music
      Remembering, and the animal also looks into the face of man
      tender trust, and man looks down into his eyes
      with pensive affection.
  It is as if the two friends in masks meet and each other
      faintly suspect under the cladding.




80


  With one look out of your eyes, beautiful woman, you could do all of that
      Plunder the wealth of songs that sound the poet's harps!
  But you have no ear for her praises, that's why I want your praise
      to sing.
  You could bow the proudest heads of the earth at your feet.
  But those you choose, your beloved and adored ones, know that
      Not fame, that's why I adore you.
  The beauty of your arms, when touched, would bring something regal
      Shine fame.
  But you use them to sweep the dust and your humble ones
      Keeping home clean, that's why I'm in awe.




81


  What are you whispering so softly in my ear, oh death, my death?
  When the flowers lower their heads in the evening and the cattle return in
      his stables, you come stealthily to my side and talk
      Words I don't understand
  Do you have to ~ so ~ free and woo me with the numbing poison
      soporific murmurs and cold kisses, oh death, my death?

  Will there not be a proud celebration for our wedding?
  Don't you want your tanned curls with a wreath?
      wrap around?
  If there is no one to carry the flag in front of you, and the night will not be
      are in flames from your red torches, oh death, my death?

  Come on with the sound of your conch trumpets, come on in the sleepless one
      Night.
  Dress me in a purple coat, take my hand and take me.
  Let your car be ready at my door with your impatient
      neighing horses.
  Lift my veil and look boldly in my face, oh death, my death!




82


  We have to play the game of death tonight, my bride and
      I.
  The night is black, the clouds willfully chase each other in the sky, and
      the waves are raging in the sea.
  We have left the feeling of our dreams, pushed open the door and
      came out, my bride and I.
  We sit on a swing and the storm winds give us one
      wild thrust from behind.
  My bride starts with fear and lust, she trembles and hugs
      to my heart.
  I have served her in love for a long time.
  I made a bed of flowers for her and I closed the doors
      to keep the intrusive light away from their eyes.
  I kissed her gently on the lips and whispered softly in her ear,
      until she half passed out with longing.
  She was lost in the endless mist of drunken sweetness.
  She did not respond to my touch, my songs could do her
      not to awaken.
  Tonight the call of the storm has come to us from the wilderness.
  My bride shuddered and got up; she took my hand and kicked
      out.
  Her hair flies in the wind, her veil flutters, and the wreath that is around
      her neck hangs, rustles on her chest.
  The shock of death swung them into life.
  We stand face to face and heart to heart, my bride and I.




83


  She lived by the hills on the edge of a cornfield, near the spring
      which in laughing bubbles through the solemn shadows of old
      Trees flowing. The women came there to fill their jugs, and
      Wanderers used to rest and chat there. She worked and
      dreamed daily to the way of the murmuring river.

  One evening the stranger came down from the cloud-covered summit;
      his curls were tangled like sleepy snakes. We
      asked in astonishment: "Who are you?" He did not answer, but
      sat down by the chatty river and looked in silence
      the hut where she lived. Our hearts trembled in fear and so did we
      came home when it was night.

  The next morning when the women came to fetch water at the spring
      under the deodar trees, they found the doors open in theirs
      Hut but her voice was gone and where was her smiling one
      Face? The empty jug was on the floor, and her lamp in the
      Corner was burned out. Nobody knew where she had fled to before
      the morning dawned - and the stranger was gone.

  In the May moon the sun got hot and the snow melted, and so did we
      sat by the spring and wept. We asked ourselves in our minds:
      “Is there a source in the country where she has gone where she?
      can fill her jug ​​in these hot, thirsty days? ”And we
      asked each other anxiously: “Is there beyond these hills where we
      live, a country? "

  It was a summer night; from the south the breeze swept away and I sat in
      her deserted room where the lamp is still unlit
      was standing. When suddenly the hills disappeared before my eyes, as if to
      Side drawn curtains. “Ah, it is she who is coming. How are you
      You, my child? Are you happy? But where can you stay?
      under this open sky And, alas! our source is not there
      to relieve your thirst. "

  “Here is the same sky,” she said, “only free from the narrow ones
      Hills, - that's the same river, grown into a stream - the
      same earth, expanded into a plane. "" Everything is there, "I sighed,
      “Just not us.” She smiled sadly and said: “You are in
      my heart. ”I woke up to hear the murmur of the river
      and the nocturnal rustling of the deodars.




84


  The shadows sweep across the green and yellow rice fields
      Autumn clouds followed by the fast-chasing sun.
  The bees forget to sip their honey, stumble drunk with light
      and hum foolishly to each other.
  The ducks on the islands in the river scream for joy, without anyone
      Occasion.
  Don't let anyone go home, brothers, this morning, don't let anyone go to them
      Go to work.
  Let's take the sky by storm and loot space on the run.
  Laughter floats in the air like foam on the tide.
  Brethren, let us waste our mornings with useless songs.




85


  Who are you, reader, who have been reading my songs for over a hundred years today
      becomes?
  I cannot send you a single flower of this one
      Spring abundance, not a single strip of gold from the clouds
      above.
  Open your door and look out.
  Pick fragrant memories of them in your blooming garden
      vanished flowers a hundred years ago.
  In the joy of your heart you may feel the living joy that
      sang one spring morning and broadcast her joyful voice
      over a hundred years.




TRANSLATOR'S NOTES AND AFTERWORDS


To poem:


1: _Saptaparna_ (Alstonia scholaris), seven-leaf, after the number of its
whorled leaves named tree.

_Açoka_ (Jonesia Asoka), a tree sacred to Shiva. It means, that
the touch of a woman's foot makes it bloom.


10: _Sign of luck_. Every devout Hindu draws the morning after
Bath his forehead with the sacred sign (pundra or tilaka) that comes with
different sects, sometimes arc-like, sometimes circular,
sometimes formed by three horizontal lines (tri-pundra).


14: _Kokil, Koïl_ (Sanskrit kokila), is the Indian cuckoo
(eudynamis orientalis), who sings very beautifully.


16: _Henna_ (from the Arab. Hina), leaf plant (lawsonia inermis). The
red juice is used for coloring the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.


17: _Kusm_, Sanskrit Kusumbha, name for real saffron (crocus sativus)
and loggerheads (Carthamus tinctorius). From the leaves of the fake
Saffron is obtained as a red dye. _Kadam_, Sanskrit Kadamba
(Nauclea Cadamba), tree with orange-colored fragrant flowers.


64: _Ashath_, Sanskrit Açvattha, a species of fig tree (ficus religiosa),
which is sacred like the vata characteristic of India
(ficus indica, the so-called aerial fig; cf. poem 13). The
Açvattha takes root in the crevices of other trees, in walls and
Houses and destroys them.


83: _Deodar_ (devadāru, actually tree of the gods), a type of pine
(Pinus Deodora). According to Wilson, this name refers to in Bengal
Uvaria longifolia. Pinus Deodara grows to a height of 6000 to
12,000 feet above the sea.

The German translation is based as closely as possible on the
English transmission worked, the English sentence melody became
mostly imitated, any increased rhythm was avoided. At
I thank the comments for much of the friendliness of the Berliner
Sanskritists, Prof. Heinrich Lüders.




TABLE OF CONTENTS


  Foreword by the poet V

  The gardener 1

  Poet, the evening is coming 4

  In the morning I threw my net out 6

  Oh why did they build my house 7

  I am peaceless 9

  The tame bird was in a cage 11

  O mother, the young prince must come to our door
  come over 13

  When the lamp on my bed went out 15

  When I go to the rendezvous at night 17

  Leave your work, bride 18

  Come as you are 20

  If you ever want to be hardworking 22

  I asked for nothing 24

  I wandered down the street 26

  I run like a muskrat 28

  Hands are entwined in hands 29

  The yellow bird sings on her tree 31

  When the two sisters go to fetch water 33

  You walked the riverside path on river 34

  Every day he comes 35

  What drove him 36

  As she passed me with quick steps 37

  Why are you sitting there 38

  Don't keep it to yourself 39

  Come to us, young man 40

  What comes out of your willing hands 41

  Trust in Love 42

  Your questioning eyes are sad 43

  Speak to me beloved 45

  You are the evening cloud 46

  My heart, the bird of the wild 47

  Tell me if this is all true 48

  I love you beloved 50

  Don't go beloved 52

  I don't recognize you too easily 53

  He whispered 54

  Would you like your wreath 55

  Dearest, a long time ago 56

  I'm trying to wind a wreath 57

  An incredulous smile flits across your face 58

  I long to speak the deepest words 59

  You great, wonderful drunkard! 61

  No friends 64

  Venerable Father 65

  The guests who have to leave 67

  You left me and went your way                    68

  If you want it that way 70

  Free me from gangs 71

  I'm holding her hands 72

  Beloved, my heart yearns day and night 73

  Then finish the last song 74

  Why did the lamp go out 75

  Why are you making me blush 76

  Where are you rushing to with your basket 78

  It was noon when you left 79

  I was one of the many women 81

  I picked your flower 83

  One morning in the flower garden 84

  Oh woman, you are not the only creature of God 85

  In the middle of the crowd and noise 86

  Hush my heart 87

  I walked the twilight path of a dream in 88

  Wanderer, do you have to go? 89

  I spent my day 91

  Is it you again who calls? 93

  A wandering fool was looking for the Philosopher's Stone 95

  Whether the evening will come too 97

  Nobody lives forever 99

  I hunt for the golden stag 101

  I think back to a day 102

  The day is not yet at 103

  In Days of Hard Work 106

  Infinite wealth is not your 108

  In the reception hall of the world 110

  At midnight he spoke to his heart 111

  The fair was in front of the temple 112

  The Worker and His Wife 113

  It was May 115

  I often ask myself 116

  With a look out of your eyes 117

  What are you whispering to me so softly 118

  We must play the game of death 119

  She lived near the hills 121

  Across the green and yellow rice fields 124

  Who are you, reader 125

  Translator's Notes and Afterword 127


[Illustration]

                               Printed
                           in the spring of 1921
                         at Poeschel & Trepte
                              in Leipzig
                                   *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Der Gärtner, by Rabindranath Tagore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GARDENERS ***

***** This file should be named 44424-0.txt or 44424-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/4/4/2/44424/

Produced by Norbert H. Langkau, Marc-Andre Seekamp and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one - the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-TM electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
Charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission. If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research. They may be modified and printed and given away - you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks. Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-TM mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark / copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. lake
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-TM electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the project
Gutenberg-TM mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
This agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-TM name associated with
the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
Access to, the full Project Gutenberg-TM License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg "is associated" is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
Access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-TM electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-TM works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. "

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s / he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License. You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-TM electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund "described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
Receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
Receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-TM work, and (c) any defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-TM is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection wants
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501 (c) (3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Gutenberg Project
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by US federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712. but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. E-mail
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Gutenberg Project
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-TM depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($ 1 to $ 5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. US laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
