The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fruit-Gathering, by Rabindranath Tagore

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fruit-Gathering

Author: Rabindranath Tagore

Posting Date: March 6, 2009 [EBook #6522]
Release Date: September, 2004
First Posted: December 25, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRUIT-GATHERING ***




Produced by Chetan K. Jain and Eric Eldred








Original html version created at eldritchpress.org by Eric Eldred.
This eBook was produced by Chetan K. Jain.




Fruit-Gathering


By Rabindranath Tagore


[Translated from Bengali to English by the author]


New York: The Macmillan Company, 1916




I

Bid me and I shall gather my fruits to bring them in full baskets
into your courtyard, though some are lost and some not ripe.

For the season grows heavy with its fulness, and there is a
plaintive shepherd's pipe in the shade.

Bid me and I shall set sail on the river.

The March wind is fretful, fretting the languid waves into
murmurs.

The garden has yielded its all, and in the weary hour of evening
the call comes from your house on the shore in the sunset.



II

My life when young was like a flower--a flower that loosens a
petal or two from her abundance and never feels the loss when the
spring breeze comes to beg at her door.

Now at the end of youth my life is like a fruit, having nothing
to spare, and waiting to offer herself completely with her full
burden of sweetness.



III

Is summer's festival only for fresh blossoms and not also for
withered leaves and faded flowers?

Is the song of the sea in tune only with the rising waves?

Does it not also sing with the waves that fall?

Jewels are woven into the carpet where stands my king, but there
are patient clods waiting to be touched by his feet.

Few are the wise and the great who sit by my Master, but he has
taken the foolish in his arms and made me his servant for ever.



IV

I woke and found his letter with the morning.

I do not know what it says, for I cannot read.

I shall leave the wise man alone with his books, I shall not
trouble him, for who knows if he can read what the letter says.

Let me hold it to my forehead and press it to my heart.

When the night grows still and stars come out one by one I will
spread it on my lap and stay silent.

The rustling leaves will read it aloud to me, the rushing stream
will chant it, and the seven wise stars will sing it to me from
the sky.

I cannot find what I seek, I cannot understand what I would
learn; but this unread letter has lightened my burdens and turned
my thoughts into songs.



V

A handful of dust could hide your signal when I did not know its
meaning.

Now that I am wiser I read it in all that hid it before.

It is painted in petals of flowers; waves flash it from their
foam; hills hold it high on their summits.

I had my face turned from you, therefore I read the letters awry
and knew not their meaning.



VI

Where roads are made I lose my way.

In the wide water, in the blue sky there is no line of a track.

The pathway is hidden by the birds' wings, by the star-fires, by
the flowers of the wayfaring seasons.

And I ask my heart if its blood carries the wisdom of the unseen
way.



VII

Alas, I cannot stay in the house, and home has become no home to
me, for the eternal Stranger calls, he is going along the road.

The sound of his footfall knocks at my breast; it pains me!

The wind is up, the sea is moaning.  I leave all my cares and
doubts to follow the homeless tide, for the Stranger calls me, he
is going along the road.



VIII

Be ready to launch forth, my heart! and let those linger who
must.

For your name has been called in the morning sky.

Wait for none!

The desire of the bud is for the night and dew, but the blown
flower cries for the freedom of light.

Burst your sheath, my heart, and come forth!



IX

When I lingered among my hoarded treasure I felt like a worm that
feeds in the dark upon the fruit where it was born.

I leave this prison of decay.

I care not to haunt the mouldy stillness, for I go in search of
everlasting youth; I throw away all that is not one with my life
nor as light as my laughter.

I run through time and, O my heart, in your chariot dances the
poet who sings while he wanders.



X

You took my hand and drew me to your side, made me sit on the
high seat before all men, till I became timid, unable to stir and
walk my own way; doubting and debating at every step lest I
should tread upon any thorn of their disfavour.

I am freed at last!

The blow has come, the drum of insult sounded, my seat is laid
low in the dust.

My paths are open before me.

My wings are full of the desire of the sky.

I go to join the shooting stars of midnight, to plunge into the
profound shadow.

I am like the storm-driven cloud of summer that, having cast off
its crown of gold, hangs as a sword the thunderbolt upon a chain
of lightning.

In desperate joy I run upon the dusty path of the despised; I
draw near to your final welcome.

The child finds its mother when it leaves her womb.

When I am parted from you, thrown out from your household, I am
free to see your face.



XI

It decks me only to mock me, this jewelled chain of mine.

It bruises me when on my neck, it strangles me when I struggle to
tear it off.

It grips my throat, it chokes my singing.

Could I but offer it to your hand, my Lord, I would be saved.

Take it from me, and in exchange bind me to you with a garland,
for I am ashamed to stand before you with this jewelled chain on
my neck.



XII

Far below flowed the Jumna, swift and clear, above frowned the
jutting bank.

Hills dark with the woods and scarred with the torrents were
gathered around.

Govinda, the great Sikh teacher, sat on the rock reading
scriptures, when Raghunath, his disciple, proud of his wealth,
came and bowed to him and said, "I have brought my poor present
unworthy of your acceptance."

Thus saying he displayed before the teacher a pair of gold
bangles wrought with costly stones.

The master took up one of them, twirling it round his finger, and
the diamonds darted shafts of light.

Suddenly it slipped from his hand and rolled down the bank into
the water.

"Alas," screamed Raghunath, and jumped into the stream.

The teacher set his eyes upon his book, and the water held and
hid what it stole and went its way.

The daylight faded when Raghunath came back to the teacher tired
and dripping.

He panted and said, "I can still get it back if you show me where
it fell."

The teacher took up the remaining bangle and throwing it into the
water said, "It is there."



XIII

To move is to meet you every moment,
  Fellow-traveller!

It is to sing to the falling of your feet.

He whom your breath touches does not glide by the shelter of the
bank.

He spreads a reckless sail to the wind and rides the turbulent
water.

He who throws his doors open and steps onward receives your
greeting.

He does not stay to count his gain or to mourn his loss; his
heart beats the drum for his march, for that is to march with you
every step,

    Fellow-traveller!



XIV

My portion of the best in this world will come from your hands:
such was your promise.

Therefore your light glistens in my tears.

I fear to be led by others lest I miss you waiting in some road
corner to be my guide.

I walk my own wilful way till my very folly tempts you to my
door.

For I have your promise that my portion of the best in this world
will come from your hands.



XV

Your speech is simple, my Master, but not theirs who talk of you.

I understand the voice of your stars and the silence of your
trees.

I know that my heart would open like a flower; that my life has
filled itself at a hidden fountain.

Your songs, like birds from the lonely land of snow, are winging
to build their nests in my heart against the warmth of its April,
and I am content to wait for the merry season.



XVI

They knew the way and went to seek you along the narrow lane, but
I wandered abroad into the night for I was ignorant.

I was not schooled enough to be afraid of you in the dark,
therefore I came upon your doorstep unaware.

The wise rebuked me and bade me be gone, for I had not come by
the lane.

I turned away in doubt, but you held me fast, and their scolding
became louder every day.



XVII

I brought out my earthen lamp from my house and cried, "Come,
children, I will light your path!"

The night was still dark when I returned, leaving the road to its
silence, crying, "Light me, O Fire! for my earthen lamp lies
broken in the dust!"



XVIII

No: it is not yours to open buds into blossoms.

Shake the bud, strike it; it is beyond your power to make it
blossom.

Your touch soils it, you tear its petals to pieces and strew them
in the dust.

But no colours appear, and no perfume.

Ah! it is not for you to open the bud into a blossom.

He who can open the bud does it so simply.

He gives it a glance, and the life-sap stirs through its veins.

At his breath the flower spreads its wings and flutters in the
wind.

Colours flush out like heart-longings, the perfume betrays a
sweet secret.

He who can open the bud does it so simply.



XIX

Sudas, the gardener, plucked from his tank the last lotus left by
the ravage of winter and went to sell it to the king at the
palace gate.

There he met a traveller who said to him, "Ask your price for the
last lotus,--I shall offer it to Lord Buddha."

Sudas said, "If you pay one golden _masha_ it will be yours."

The traveller paid it.

At that moment the king came out and he wished to buy the flower,
for he was on his way to see Lord Buddha, and he thought, "It
would be a fine thing to lay at his feet the lotus that bloomed
in winter."

When the gardener said he had been offered a golden masha the
king offered him ten, but the traveller doubled the price.

The gardener, being greedy, imagined a greater gain from him for
whose sake they were bidding.  He bowed and said, "I cannot sell
this lotus."

In the hushed shade of the mango grove beyond the city wall Sudas
stood before Lord Buddha, on whose lips sat the silence of love
and whose eyes beamed peace like the morning star of the
dew-washed autumn.

Sudas looked in his face and put the lotus at his feet and bowed
his head to the dust.

Buddha smiled and asked, "What is your wish, my son?"

Sudas cried, "The least touch of your feet."



XX

Make me thy poet, O Night, veiled Night!

There are some who have sat speechless for ages in thy shadow;
let me utter their songs.

Take me up on thy chariot without wheels, running noiselessly
from world to world, thou queen in the palace of time, thou
darkly beautiful!

Many a questioning mind has stealthily entered thy courtyard and
roamed through thy lampless house seeking for answers.

From many a heart, pierced with the arrow of joy from the hands
of the Unknown, have burst forth glad chants, shaking the
darkness to its foundation.

Those wakeful souls gaze in the starlight in wonder at the
treasure they have suddenly found.

Make me their poet, O Night, the poet of thy fathomless silence.



XXI

I will meet one day the Life within me, the joy that hides in my
life, though the days perplex my path with their idle dust.

I have known it in glimpses, and its fitful breath has come upon
me, making my thoughts fragrant for a while.

I will meet one day the Joy without me that dwells behind the
screen of light--and will stand in the overflowing solitude where
all things are seen as by their creator.



XXII

This autumn morning is tired with excess of light, and if your
songs grow fitful and languid give me your flute awhile.

I shall but play with it as the whim takes me,--now take it on my
lap, now touch it with my lips, now keep it by my side on the
grass.

But in the solemn evening stillness I shall gather flowers, to
deck it with wreaths, I shall fill it with fragrance; I shall
worship it with the lighted lamp.

Then at night I shall come to you and give you back your flute.

You will play on it the music of midnight when the lonely
crescent moon wanders among the stars.



XXIII

The poet's mind floats and dances on the waves of life amidst the
voices of wind and water.

Now when the sun has set and the darkened sky draws upon the sea
like drooping lashes upon a weary eye it is time to take away his
pen, and let his thoughts sink into the bottom of the deep amid
the eternal secret of that silence.



XXIV

The night is dark and your slumber is deep in the hush of my
being.

Wake, O Pain of Love, for I know not how to open the door, and I
stand outside.

The hours wait, the stars watch, the wind is still, the silence
is heavy in my heart.

Wake, Love, wake! brim my empty cup, and with a breath of song
ruffle the night.



XXV

The bird of the morning sings.

Whence has he word of the morning before the morning breaks, and
when the dragon night still holds the sky in its cold black
coils?

Tell me, bird of the morning, how, through the twofold night of
the sky and the leaves, he found his way into your dream, the
messenger out of the east?

The world did not believe you when you cried, "The sun is on his
way, the night is no more."

O sleeper, awake!

Bare your forehead, waiting for the first blessing of light, and
sing with the bird of the morning in glad faith.



XXVI

The beggar in me lifted his lean hands to the starless sky and
cried into night's ear with his hungry voice.

His prayers were to the blind Darkness who lay like a fallen god
in a desolate heaven of lost hopes.

The cry of desire eddied round a chasm of despair, a wailing bird
circling its empty nest.

But when morning dropped anchor at the rim of the East, the
beggar in me leapt and cried:

"Blessed am I that the deaf night denied me--that its coffer was
empty."

He cried, "O Life, O Light, you are precious! and precious is the
joy that at last has known you!"



XXVII

Sanatan was telling his beads by the Ganges when a Brahmin in
rags came to him and said, "Help me, I am poor!"

"My alms-bowl is all that is my own," said Sanatan, "I have given
away everything I had."

"But my lord Shiva came to me in my dreams," said the Brahmin,
"and counselled me to come to you."

Sanatan suddenly remembered he had picked up a stone without
price among the pebbles on the river-bank, and thinking that some
one might need it hid it in the sands.

He pointed out the spot to the Brahmin, who wondering dug up the
stone.

The Brahmin sat on the earth and mused alone till the sun went
down behind the trees, and cowherds went home with their cattle.

Then he rose and came slowly to Sanatan and said, "Master, give
me the least fraction of the wealth that disdains all the wealth
of the world."

And he threw the precious stone into the water.



XXVIII

Time after time I came to your gate with raised hands, asking for
more and yet more.

You gave and gave, now in slow measure, now in sudden excess.

I took some, and some things I let drop; some lay heavy on my
hands; some I made into playthings and broke them when tired;
till the wrecks and the hoard of your gifts grew immense, hiding
you, and the ceaseless expectation wore my heart out.

Take, oh take--has now become my cry.

Shatter all from this beggar's bowl: put out this lamp of the
importunate watcher: hold my hands, raise me from the
still-gathering heap of your gifts into the bare infinity of
your uncrowded presence.



XXIX

You have set me among those who are defeated.

I know it is not for me to win, nor to leave the game.

I shall plunge into the pool although but to sink to the bottom.

I shall play the game of my undoing.

I shall stake all I have and when I lose my last penny I shall
stake myself, and then I think I shall have won through my utter
defeat.



XXX

A smile of mirth spread over the sky when you dressed my heart in
rags and sent her forth into the road to beg.

She went from door to door, and many a time when her bowl was
nearly full she was robbed.

At the end of the weary day she came to your palace gate holding
up her pitiful bowl, and you came and took her hand and seated
her beside you on your throne.



XXXI

"Who among you will take up the duty of feeding the hungry?"
Lord Buddha asked his followers when famine raged at Shravasti.

Ratnakar, the banker, hung his head and said, "Much more is
needed than all my wealth to feed the hungry."

Jaysen, the chief of the King's army, said, "I would gladly give
my life's blood, but there is not enough food in my house."

Dharmapaal, who owned broad acres of land, said with a sigh, "The
drought demon has sucked my fields dry.  I know not how to pay
King's dues."

Then rose Supriya, the mendicant's daughter.

She bowed to all and meekly said, "I will feed the hungry."

"How!"  they cried in surprise.  "How can you hope to fulfil that
vow?"

"I am the poorest of you all," said Supriya, "that is my
strength.  I have my coffer and my store at each of your houses."



XXXII

My king was unknown to me, therefore when he claimed his tribute
I was bold to think I would hide myself leaving my debts unpaid.

I fled and fled behind my day's work and my night's dreams.

But his claims followed me at every breath I drew.

Thus I came to know that I am known to him and no place left
which is mine.

Now I wish to lay my all before his feet, and gain the right to
my place in his kingdom.



XXXIII

When I thought I would mould you, an image from my life for men
to worship, I brought my dust and desires and all my coloured
delusions and dreams.

When I asked you to mould with my life an image from your heart
for you to love, you brought your fire and force, and truth,
loveliness and peace.



XXXIV

"Sire," announced the servant to the King, "the saint Narottam
has never deigned to enter your royal temple.

"He is singing God's praise under the trees by the open road.
The temple is empty of worshippers.

"They flock round him like bees round the white lotus, leaving
the golden jar of honey unheeded."

The King, vexed at heart, went to the spot where Narottam sat on
the grass.

He asked him, "Father, why leave my temple of the golden dome and
sit on the dust outside to preach God's love?"

"Because God is not there in your temple," said Narottam.

The King frowned and said, "Do you know, twenty millions of gold
went to the making of that marvel of art, and it was consecrated
to God with costly rites?"

"Yes, I know it," answered Narottam.  "It was in that year when
thousands of your people whose houses had been burned stood
vainly asking for help at your door.

"And God said, 'The poor creature who can give no shelter to his
brothers would build my house!'

"And he took his place with the shelterless under the trees by
the road.

"And that golden bubble is empty of all but hot vapour of pride."

The King cried in anger, "Leave my land."

Calmly said the saint, "Yes, banish me where you have banished my
God."



XXXV

The trumpet lies in the dust.

The wind is weary, the light is dead.

Ah, the evil day!

Come, fighters, carrying your flags, and singers, with your
war-songs!

Come, pilgrims of the march, hurrying on your journey!

The trumpet lies in the dust waiting for us.

I was on my way to the temple with my evening offerings, seeking
for a place of rest after the day's dusty toil: hoping my hurts
would be healed and the stains in my garment washed white, when I
found thy trumpet lying in the dust.

Was it not the hour for me to light my evening lamp?

Had not the night sung its lullaby to the stars?

O thou blood-red rose, my poppies of sleep have paled and faded!

I was certain my wanderings were over and my debts all paid when
suddenly I came upon thy trumpet lying in the dust.

Strike my drowsy heart with thy spell of youth!

Let my joy in life blaze up in fire.  Let the shafts of awakening
fly through the heart of night, and a thrill of dread shake
blindness and palsy.

I have come to raise thy trumpet from the dust.

Sleep is no more for me--my walk shall be through showers of
arrows.

Some shall run out of their houses and come to my side--some
shall weep.

Some in their beds shall toss and groan in dire dreams.

For to-night thy trumpet shall be sounded.

From thee I have asked peace only to find shame.

Now I stand before thee--help me to put on my armour!

Let hard blows of trouble strike fire into my life.

Let my heart beat in pain, the drum of thy victory.

My hands shall be utterly emptied to take up thy trumpet.



XXXVI

When, mad in their mirth, they raised dust to soil thy robe, O
Beautiful, it made my heart sick.

I cried to thee and said, "Take thy rod of punishment and judge
them."

The morning light struck upon those eyes, red with the revel of
night; the place of the white lily greeted their burning breath;
the stars through the depth of the sacred dark stared at their
carousing--at those that raised dust to soil thy robe, O
Beautiful!

Thy judgment seat was in the flower garden, in the birds' notes
in springtime: in the shady river-banks, where the trees muttered
in answer to the muttering of the waves.

O my Lover, they were pitiless in their passion.

They prowled in the dark to snatch thy ornaments to deck their
own desires.

When they had struck thee and thou wert pained, it pierced me to
the quick, and I cried to thee and said, "Take thy sword, O my
Lover, and judge them!"

Ah, but thy justice was vigilant.

A mother's tears were shed on their insolence; the imperishable
faith of a lover hid their spears of rebellion in its own wounds.

Thy judgment was in the mute pain of sleepless love: in the blush
of the chaste: in the tears of the night of the desolate: in the
pale morning-light of forgiveness.

O Terrible, they in their reckless greed climbed thy gate at
night, breaking into thy storehouse to rob thee.

But the weight of their plunder grew immense, too heavy to carry
or to remove.

Thereupon I cried to thee and said, Forgive them, O Terrible!

Thy forgiveness burst in storms, throwing them down, scattering
their thefts in the dust.

Thy forgiveness was in the thunder-stone; in the shower of blood;
in the angry red of the sunset.



XXXVII

Upagupta, the disciple of Buddha, lay asleep on the dust by the
city wall of Mathura.

Lamps were all out, doors were all shut, and stars were all
hidden by the murky sky of August.

Whose feet were those tinkling with anklets, touching his breast
of a sudden?

He woke up startled, and the light from a woman's lamp struck his
forgiving eyes.

It was the dancing girl, starred with jewels, clouded with a
pale-blue mantle, drunk with the wine of her youth.

She lowered her lamp and saw the young face, austerely beautiful.

"Forgive me, young ascetic," said the woman; "graciously come to
my house.  The dusty earth is not a fit bed for you."

The ascetic answered, "Woman, go on your way; when the time is
ripe I will come to you."

Suddenly the black night showed its teeth in a flash of
lightning.

The storm growled from the corner of the sky, and the woman
trembled in fear.

......

The branches of the wayside trees were aching with blossom.

Gay notes of the flute came floating in the warm spring air from
afar.

The citizens had gone to the woods, to the festival of flowers.

From the mid-sky gazed the full moon on the shadows of the silent
town.

The young ascetic was walking in the lonely street, while
overhead the lovesick _koels_ urged from the mango branches
their sleepless plaint.

Upagupta passed through the city gates, and stood at the base of
the rampart.

What woman lay in the shadow of the wall at his feet, struck with
the black pestilence, her body spotted with sores, hurriedly
driven away from the town?

The ascetic sat by her side, taking her head on his knees, and
moistened her lips with water and smeared her body with balm.

"Who are you, merciful one?"  asked the woman.

"The time, at last, has come to visit you, and I am here,"
replied the young ascetic.



XXXVIII

This is no mere dallying of love between us, my lover.

Again and again have swooped down upon me the screaming nights of
storm, blowing out my lamp: dark doubts have gathered, blotting
out all stars from my sky.

Again and again the banks have burst, letting the flood sweep
away my harvest, and wailing and despair have rent my sky from
end to end.

This have I learnt that there are blows of pain in your love,
never the cold apathy of death.



XXXIX

The wall breaks asunder, light, like divine laughter, bursts in.
Victory, O Light!

The heart of the night is pierced!

With your flashing sword cut in twain the tangle of doubt and
feeble desires!

Victory!

Come, Implacable!

Come, you who are terrible in your whiteness.

O Light, your drum sounds in the march of fire, and the red torch
is held on high; death dies in a burst of splendour!



XL

O fire, my brother, I sing victory to you.

You are the bright red image of fearful freedom.

You swing your arms in the sky, you sweep your impetuous fingers
across the harp-string, your dance music is beautiful.

When my days are ended and the gates are opened you will burn to
ashes this cordage of hands and feet.

My body will be one with you, my heart will be caught in the
whirls of your frenzy, and the burning heat that was my life will
flash up and mingle itself in your flame.



XLI

The Boatman is out crossing the wild sea at night.

The mast is aching because of its full sails filled with the
violent wind.

Stung with the night's fang the sky falls upon the sea, poisoned
with black fear.

The waves dash their heads against the dark unseen, and the
Boatman is out crossing the wild sea.

The Boatman is out, I know not for what tryst, startling the
night with the sudden white of his sails.

I know not at what shore, at last, he lands to reach the silent
courtyard where the lamp is burning and to find her who sits in
the dust and waits.

What is the quest that makes his boat care not for storm nor
darkness?

Is it heavy with gems and pearls?

Ah, no, the Boatman brings with him no treasure, but only a white
rose in his hand and a song on his lips.

It is for her who watches alone at night with her lamp burning.

She dwells in the wayside hut.  Her loose hair flies in the wind
and hides her eyes.

The storm shrieks through her broken doors, the light flickers in
her earthen lamp flinging shadows on the walls.

Through the howl of the winds she hears him call her name, she
whose name is unknown.

It is long since the Boatman sailed.  It will be long before the
day breaks and he knocks at the door.

The drums will not be beaten and none will know.

Only light shall fill the house, blessed shall be the dust, and
the heart glad.

All doubts shall vanish in silence when the Boatman comes to the
shore.



XLII

I cling to this living raft, my body, in the narrow stream of my
earthly years.

I leave it when the crossing is over.  And then?

I do not know if the light there and the darkness are the same.

The Unknown is the perpetual freedom:

He is pitiless in his love.

He crushes the shell for the pearl, dumb in the prison of the
dark.

You muse and weep for the days that are done, poor heart!

Be glad that days are to come!

The hour strikes, O pilgrim!

It is time for you to take the parting of the ways!

His face will be unveiled once again and you shall meet.



XLIII

Over the relic of Lord Buddha King Bimbisar built a shrine, a
salutation in white marble.

There in the evening would come all the brides and daughters of
the King's house to offer flowers and light lamps.

When the son became king in his time he washed his father's creed
away with blood, and lit sacrificial fires with its sacred books.

The autumn day was dying.  The evening hour of worship was near.

Shrimati, the queen's maid, devoted to Lord Buddha, having bathed
in holy water, and decked the golden tray with lamps and fresh
white blossoms, silently raised her dark eyes to the queen's
face.

The queen shuddered in fear and said, "Do you not know, foolish
girl, that death is the penalty for whoever brings worship to
Buddha's shrine?

"Such is the king's will."

Shrimati bowed to the queen, and turning away from her door came
and stood before Amita, the newly wed bride of the king's son.

A mirror of burnished gold on her lap, the newly wed bride was
braiding her dark long tresses and painting the red spot of good
luck at the parting of her hair.

Her hands trembled when she saw the young maid, and she cried,
"What fearful peril would you bring me! Leave me this instant."

Princess Shukla sat at the window reading her book of romance by
the light of the setting sun.

She started when she saw at her door the maid with the sacred
offerings.

Her book fell down from her lap, and she whispered in Shrimati's
ears, "Rush not to death, daring woman!"

Shrimati walked from door to door.  She raised her head and
cried, "O women of the king's house, hasten!

"The time for our Lord's worship is come!"

Some shut their doors in her face and some reviled her.

The last gleam of daylight faded from the bronze dome of the
palace tower.

Deep shadows settled in street corners: the bustle of the city
was hushed: the gong at the temple of Shiva announced the time of
the evening prayer.

In the dark of the autumn evening, deep as a limpid lake, stars
throbbed with light, when the guards of the palace garden were
startled to see through the trees a row of lamps burning at the
shrine of Buddha.

They ran with their swords unsheathed, crying, "Who are you,
foolish one, reckless of death?"

"I am Shrimati," replied a sweet voice, "the servant of Lord
Buddha."

The next moment her heart's blood coloured the cold marble with
its red.

And in the still hour of stars died the light of the last lamp of
worship at the foot of the shrine.



XLIV

The day that stands between you and me makes her last bow of
farewell.

The night draws her veil over her face, and hides the one lamp
burning in my chamber.

Your dark servant comes noiselessly and spreads the bridal carpet
for you to take your seat there alone with me in the wordless
silence till night is done.



XLV

My night has passed on the bed of sorrow, and my eyes are tired.
My heavy heart is not yet ready to meet morning with its crowded
joys.

Draw a veil over this naked light, beckon aside from me this
glaring flash and dance of life.

Let the mantle of tender darkness cover me in its folds, and
cover my pain awhile from the pressure of the world.



XLVI

The time is past when I could repay her for all that I received.

Her night has found its morning and thou hast taken her to thy
arms: and to thee I bring my gratitude and my gifts that were for
her.

For all hurts and offences to her I come to thee for forgiveness.

I offer to thy service those flowers of my love that remained in
bud when she waited for them to open.



XLVII

I found a few old letters of mine carefully hidden in her box--a
few small toys for her memory to play with.

With a timorous heart she tried to steal these trifles from
time's turbulent stream, and said, "These are mine only!"

Ah, there is no one now to claim them, who can pay their price
with loving care, yet here they are still.

Surely there is love in this world to save her from utter loss,
even like this love of hers that saved these letters with such
fond care.



XLVIII

Bring beauty and order into my forlorn life, woman, as you
brought them into my house when you lived.

Sweep away the dusty fragments of the hours, fill the empty jars,
and mend all that has been neglected.

Then open the inner door of the shrine, light the candle, and let
us meet there in silence before our God.



XLIX

The pain was great when the strings were being tuned, my Master!

Begin your music, and let me forget the pain; let me feel in
beauty what you had in your mind through those pitiless days.

The waning night lingers at my doors, let her take her leave in
songs.

Pour your heart into my life strings, my Master, in tunes that
descend from your stars.



L

In the lightning flash of a moment I have seen the immensity of
your creation in my life--creation through many a death from
world to world.

I weep at my unworthiness when I see my life in the hands of the
unmeaning hours,--but when I see it in your hands I know it is
too precious to be squandered among shadows.



LI

I know that at the dim end of some day the sun will bid me its
farewell.

Shepherds will play their pipes beneath the banyan trees, and
cattle graze on the slope by the river, while my days will pass
into the dark.

This is my prayer, that I may know before I leave why the earth
called me to her arms.

Why her night's silence spoke to me of stars, and her daylight
kissed my thoughts into flower.

Before I go may I linger over my last refrain, completing its
music, may the lamp be lit to see your face and the wreath woven
to crown you.



LII

What music is that in whose measure the world is rocked?

We laugh when it beats upon the crest of life, we shrink in
terror when it returns into the dark.

But the play is the same that comes and goes with the rhythm of
the endless music.

You hide your treasure in the palm of your hand, and we cry that
we are robbed.

But open and shut your palm as you will, the gain and the loss
are the same.

At the game you play with your own self you lose and win at once.



LIII

I have kissed this world with my eyes and my limbs; I have wrapt
it within my heart in numberless folds; I have flooded its days
and nights with thoughts till the world and my life have grown
one,--and I love my life because I love the light of the sky so
enwoven with me.

If to leave this world be as real as to love it--then there must
be a meaning in the meeting and the parting of life.

If that love were deceived in death, then the canker of this
deceit would eat into all things, and the stars would shrivel and
grow black.



LIV

The Cloud said to me, "I vanish"; the Night said, "I plunge into
the fiery dawn."

The Pain said, "I remain in deep silence as his footprint."

"I die into the fulness," said my life to me.

The Earth said, "My lights kiss your thoughts every moment."

"The days pass," Love said, "but I wait for you."

Death said, "I ply the boat of your life across the sea."



LV

Tulsidas, the poet, was wandering, deep in thought, by the
Ganges, in that lonely spot where they burn their dead.

He found a woman sitting at the feet of the corpse of her dead
husband, gaily dressed as for a wedding.

She rose as she saw him, bowed to him, and said, "Permit me,
Master, with your blessing, to follow my husband to heaven."

"Why such hurry, my daughter?"  asked Tulsidas.  "Is not this
earth also His who made heaven?"

"For heaven I do not long," said the woman.  "I want my husband."

Tulsidas smiled and said to her, "Go back to your home, my child.
Before the month is over you will find your husband."

The woman went back with glad hope.  Tulsidas came to her every
day and gave her high thoughts to think, till her heart was
filled to the brim with divine love.

When the month was scarcely over, her neighbours came to her,
asking, "Woman, have you found your husband?"

The widow smiled and said, "I have."

Eagerly they asked, "Where is he?"

"In my heart is my lord, one with me," said the woman.



LVI

You came for a moment to my side and touched me with the great
mystery of the woman that there is in the heart of creation.

She who is ever returning to God his own outflowing of
sweetness; she is the ever fresh beauty and youth in nature; she
dances in the bubbling streams and sings in the morning light;
she with heaving waves suckles the thirsty earth; in her the
Eternal One breaks in two in a joy that no longer may contain
itself, and overflows in the pain of love.



LVII

Who is she who dwells in my heart, the woman forlorn for ever?

I wooed her and I failed to win her.  I decked her with wreaths
and sang in her praise.

A smile shone in her face for a moment, then it faded.

"I have no joy in thee," she cried, the woman in sorrow.

I bought her jewelled anklets and fanned her with a fan
gem-studded; I made her a bed on a bedstead of gold.

There flickered a gleam of gladness in her eyes, then it died.

"I have no joy in these," she cried, the woman in sorrow.

I seated her upon a car of triumph and drove her from end to end
of the earth.

Conquered hearts bowed down at her feet, and shouts of applause
rang in the sky.

Pride shone in her eyes for a moment, then it was dimmed in
tears.

"I have no joy in conquest," she cried, the woman in sorrow.

I asked her, "Tell me whom do you seek?"

She only said, "I wait for him of the unknown name."

Days pass by and she cries, "When will my beloved come whom I
know not, and be known to me for ever?"



LVIII

Yours is the light that breaks forth from the dark, and the good
that sprouts from the cleft heart of strife.

Yours is the house that opens upon the world, and the love that
calls to the battlefield.

Yours is the gift that still is a gain when everything is a loss,
and the life that flows through the caverns of death.

Yours is the heaven that lies in the common dust, and you are
there for me, you are there for all.



LIX

When the weariness of the road is upon me, and the thirst of the
sultry day; when the ghostly hours of the dusk throw their
shadows across my life, then I cry not for your voice only, my
friend, but for your touch.

There is an anguish in my heart for the burden of its riches not
given to you.

Put out your hand through the night, let me hold it and fill it
and keep it; let me feel its touch along the lengthening stretch
of my loneliness.



LX

The odour cries in the bud, "Ah me, the day departs, the happy
day of spring, and I am a prisoner in petals!"

Do not lose heart, timid thing! Your bonds will burst, the bud
will open into flower, and when you die in the fulness of life,
even then the spring will live on.

The odour pants and flutters within the bud, crying, "Ah me, the
hours pass by, yet I do not know where I go, or what it is I
seek!"

Do not lose heart, timid thing! The spring breeze has overheard
your desire, the day will not end before you have fulfilled your
being.

Dark is the future to her, and the odour cries in despair, "Ah
me, through whose fault is my life so unmeaning?

"Who can tell me, why I am at all?"  Do not lose heart, timid
thing! The perfect dawn is near when you will mingle your life
with all life and know at last your purpose.



LXI

She is still a child, my lord.

She runs about your palace and plays, and tries to make of you a
plaything as well.

She heeds not when her hair tumbles down and her careless garment
drags in the dust.

She falls asleep when you speak to her and answers not--and the
flower you give her in the morning slips to the dust from her
hands.

When the storm bursts and darkness is over the sky she is
sleepless; her dolls lie scattered on the earth and she clings to
you in terror.

She is afraid that she may fail in service to you.

But with a smile you watch her at her game.

You know her.

The child sitting in the dust is your destined bride; her play
will be stilled and deepened into love.



LXII

"What is there but the sky, O Sun, that can hold thine image?"

"I dream of thee, but to serve thee I can never hope," the
dewdrop wept and said, "I am too small to take thee unto me,
great lord, and my life is all tears."

"I illumine the limitless sky, yet I can yield myself up to a
tiny drop of dew," thus the Sun said; "I shall become but a
sparkle of light and fill you, and your little life will be a
laughing orb."



LXIII

Not for me is the love that knows no restraint, but like the
foaming wine that having burst its vessel in a moment would run
to waste.

Send me the love which is cool and pure like your rain that
blesses the thirsty earth and fills the homely earthen jars.

Send me the love that would soak down into the centre of being,
and from there would spread like the unseen sap through the
branching tree of life, giving birth to fruits and flowers.

Send me the love that keeps the heart still with the fulness of
peace.



LXIV

The sun had set on the western margin of the river among the
tangle of the forest.

The hermit boys had brought the cattle home, and sat round the
fire to listen to the master, Guatama, when a strange boy came,
and greeted him with fruits and flowers, and, bowing low at his
feet, spoke in a bird-like voice--"Lord, I have come to thee to
be taken into the path of the supreme Truth.

"My name is Satyakama."

"Blessings be on thy head," said the master.

"Of what clan art thou, my child? It is only fitting for a
Brahmin to aspire to the highest wisdom."

"Master," answered the boy, "I know not of what clan I am.  I
shall go and ask my mother."

Thus saying, Satyakama took leave, and wading across the
shallow stream, came back to his mother's hut, which stood at the
end of the sandy waste at the edge of the sleeping village.

The lamp burnt dimly in the room, and the mother stood at the
door in the dark waiting for her son's return.

She clasped him to her bosom, kissed him on his hair, and asked
him of his errand to the master.

"What is the name of my father, dear mother?"  asked the boy.

"It is only fitting for a Brahmin to aspire to the highest
wisdom, said Lord Guatama to me."

The woman lowered her eyes, and spoke in a whisper.

"In my youth I was poor and had many masters.  Thou didst come to
thy mother Jabala's arms, my darling, who had no husband."

The early rays of the sun glistened on the tree-tops of the
forest hermitage.

The students, with their tangled hair still wet with their
morning bath, sat under the ancient tree, before the master.

There came Satyakama.

He bowed low at the feet of the sage, and stood silent.

"Tell me," the great teacher asked him, "of what clan art thou?"

"My lord," he answered, "I know it not.  My mother said when I
asked her, 'I had served many masters in my youth, and thou hadst
come to thy mother Jabala's arms, who had no husband.'"

There rose a murmur like the angry hum of bees disturbed in their
hive; and the students muttered at the shameless insolence of
that outcast.

Master Guatama rose from his seat, stretched out his arms, took
the boy to his bosom, and said, "Best of all Brahmins art thou,
my child.  Thou hast the noblest heritage of truth."



LXV

May be there is one house in this city where the gate opens for
ever this morning at the touch of the sunrise, where the errand
of the light is fulfilled.

The flowers have opened in hedges and gardens, and may be there
is one heart that has found in them this morning the gift that
has been on its voyage from endless time.



LXVI

Listen, my heart, in his flute is the music of the smell of wild
flowers, of the glistening leaves and gleaming water, of shadows
resonant with bees' wings.

The flute steals his smile from my friend's lips and spreads it
over my life.



LXVII

You always stand alone beyond the stream of my songs.

The waves of my tunes wash your feet but I know not how to reach
them.

This play of mine with you is a play from afar.

It is the pain of separation that melts into melody through my
flute.

I wait for the time when your boat crosses over to my shore and
you take my flute into your own hands.



LXVIII

Suddenly the window of my heart flew open this morning, the
window that looks out on your heart.

I wondered to see that the name by which you know me is written
in April leaves and flowers, and I sat silent.

The curtain was blown away for a moment between my songs and
yours.

I found that your morning light was full of my own mute songs
unsung; I thought that I would learn them at your feet--and I sat
silent.



LXIX

You were in the centre of my heart, therefore when my heart
wandered she never found you; you hid yourself from my loves and
hopes till the last, for you were always in them.

You were the inmost joy in the play of my youth, and when I was
too busy with the play the joy was passed by.

You sang to me in the ecstasies of my life and I forgot to sing
to you.



LXX

When you hold your lamp in the sky it throws its light on my face
and its shadow falls over you.

When I hold the lamp of love in my heart its light falls on you
and I am left standing behind in the shadow.



LXXI

O the waves, the sky-devouring waves, glistening with light,
dancing with life, the waves of eddying joy, rushing for ever.

The stars rock upon them, thoughts of every tint are cast up out
of the deep and scattered on the beach of life.

Birth and death rise and fall with their rhythm, and the sea-gull
of my heart spreads its wings crying in delight.



LXXII

The joy ran from all the world to build my body.

The lights of the skies kissed and kissed her till she woke.

Flowers of hurrying summers sighed in her breath and voices of
winds and water sang in her movements.

The passion of the tide of colours in clouds and in forests
flowed into her life, and the music of all things caressed her
limbs into shape.

She is my bride,--she has lighted her lamp in my house.



LXXIII

The spring with its leaves and flowers has come into my body.

The bees hum there the morning long, and the winds idly play with
the shadows.

A sweet fountain springs up from the heart of my heart.

My eyes are washed with delight like the dew-bathed morning, and
life is quivering in all my limbs like the sounding strings of
the lute.

Are you wandering alone by the shore of my life, where the tide
is in flood, O lover of my endless days?

Are my dreams flitting round you like the moths with their
many-coloured wings?

And are those your songs that are echoing in the dark eaves of my
being?

Who but you can hear the hum of the crowded hours that sounds in
my veins to-day, the glad steps that dance in my breast, the
clamour of the restless life beating its wings in my body?



LXXIV

My bonds are cut, my debts are paid, my door has been opened, I
go everywhere.

They crouch in their corner and weave their web of pale hours,
they count their coins sitting in the dust and call me back.

But my sword is forged, my armour is put on, my horse is eager to
run.

I shall win my kingdom.



LXXV

It was only the other day that I came to your earth, naked and
nameless, with a wailing cry.

To-day my voice is glad, while you, my lord, stand aside to make
room that I may fill my life.

Even when I bring you my songs for an offering I have the secret
hope that men will come and love me for them.

You love to discover that I love this world where you have
brought me.



LXXVI

Timidly I cowered in the shadow of safety, but now, when the
surge of joy carries my heart upon its crest, my heart clings to
the cruel rock of its trouble.

I sat alone in a corner of my house thinking it too narrow for
any guest, but now when its door is flung open by an unbidden joy
I find there is room for thee and for all the world.

I walked upon tiptoe, careful of my person, perfumed, and
adorned--but now when a glad whirlwind has overthrown me in the
dust I laugh and roll on the earth at thy feet like a child.



LXXVII

The world is yours at once and for ever.

And because you have no want, my king, you have no pleasure in
your wealth.

It is as though it were naught.  Therefore through slow time you
give me what is yours, and ceaselessly win your kingdom in me.

Day after day you buy your sunrise from my heart, and you find
your love carven into the image of my life.



LXXVIII

To the birds you gave songs, the birds gave you songs in return.

You gave me only voice, yet asked for more, and I sing.

You made your winds light and they are fleet in their service.
You burdened my hands that I myself may lighten them, and at
last, gain unburdened freedom for your service.

You created your Earth filling its shadows with fragments of
light.

There you paused; you left me empty-handed in the dust to create
your heaven.

To all things else you give; from me you ask.

The harvest of my life ripens in the sun and the shower till I
reap more than you sowed, gladdening your heart, O Master of the
golden granary.



LXXIX

Let me not pray to be sheltered from dangers but to be fearless
in facing them.

Let me not beg for the stilling of my pain but for the heart to
conquer it.

Let me not look for allies in life's battlefield but to my own
strength.

Let me not crave in anxious fear to be saved but hope for the
patience to win my freedom.

Grant me that I may not be a coward, feeling your mercy in my
success alone; but let me find the grasp of your hand in my
failure.



LXXX

You did not know yourself when you dwelt alone, and there was no
crying of an errand when the wind ran from the hither to the
farther shore.

I came and you woke, and the skies blossomed with lights.

You made me open in many flowers; rocked me in the cradles of
many forms; hid me in death and found me again in life.

I came and your heart heaved; pain came to you and joy.

You touched me and tingled into love.

But in my eyes there is a film of shame and in my breast a
flicker of fear; my face is veiled and I weep when I cannot see
you.

Yet I know the endless thirst in your heart for sight of me, the
thirst that cries at my door in the repeated knockings of
sunrise.



LXXXI

You, in your timeless watch, listen to my approaching steps while
your gladness gathers in the morning twilight and breaks in the
burst of light.

The nearer I draw to you the deeper grows the fervour in the
dance of the sea.

Your world is a branching spray of light filling your hands, but
your heaven is in my secret heart; it slowly opens its buds in
shy love.



LXXXII

I will utter your name, sitting alone among the shadows of my
silent thoughts.

I will utter it without words, I will utter it without purpose.

For I am like a child that calls its mother an hundred times,
glad that it can say "Mother."



LXXXIII

I

I feel that all the stars shine in me.  The world breaks into my
life like a flood.

The flowers blossom in my body.  All the youthfulness of land and
water smokes like an incense in my heart; and the breath of all
things plays on my thoughts as on a flute.


II

When the world sleeps I come to your door.

The stars are silent, and I am afraid to sing.

I wait and watch, till your shadow passes by the balcony of night
and I return with a full heart.

Then in the morning I sing by the roadside;

The flowers in the hedge give me answer and the morning air
listens,

The travellers suddenly stop and look in my face, thinking I have
called them by their names.


III

Keep me at your door ever attending to your wishes, and let me go
about in your Kingdom accepting your call.

Let me not sink and disappear in the depth of languor.

Let not my life be worn out to tatters by penury of waste.

Let not those doubts encompass me,--the dust of distractions.

Let me not pursue many paths to gather many things.

Let me not bend my heart to the yoke of the many.

Let me hold my head high in the courage and pride of being your
servant.



LXXXIV

THE OARSMEN

  Do you hear the tumult of death afar,
  The call midst the fire-floods and poisonous clouds
  --The Captain's call to the steersman to turn the ship to an
      unnamed shore,
  For that time is over--the stagnant time in the port--
  Where the same old merchandise is bought and sold in an endless
      round,
  Where dead things drift in the exhaustion and emptiness of truth.

  They wake up in sudden fear and ask,
  "Comrades, what hour has struck?
  When shall the dawn begin?"
  The clouds have blotted away the stars--
  Who is there then can see the beckoning finger of the day?
  They run out with oars in hand, the beds are emptied, the mother
      prays, the wife watches by the door;
  There is a wail of parting that rises to the sky,
  And there is the Captain's voice in the dark:
  "Come, sailors, for the time in the harbour is over!"

  All the black evils in the world have overflowed their banks,
  Yet, oarsmen, take your places with the blessing of sorrow in
      your souls!
  Whom do you blame, brothers? Bow your heads down!
  The sin has been yours and ours.
  The heat growing in the heart of God for ages--
  The cowardice of the weak, the arrogance of the strong, the greed
      of fat prosperity, the rancour of the wronged, pride of race, and
      insult to man--
  Has burst God's peace, raging in storm.

  Like a ripe pod, let the tempest break its heart into pieces,
      scattering thunders.
  Stop your bluster of dispraise and of self-praise,
  And with the calm of silent prayer on your foreheads sail to that
      unnamed shore.

  We have known sins and evils every day and death we have known;
  They pass over our world like clouds mocking us with their
      transient lightning laughter.
  Suddenly they have stopped, become a prodigy,
  And men must stand before them saying:
  "We do not fear you, O Monster! for we have lived every day by
      conquering you,
  "And we die with the faith that Peace is true, and Good is true,
      and true is the eternal One!"

  If the Deathless dwell not in the heart of death,
  If glad wisdom bloom not bursting the sheath of sorrow,
  If sin do not die of its own revealment,
  If pride break not under its load of decorations,
  Then whence comes the hope that drives these men from their homes
      like stars rushing to their death in the morning light?
  Shall the value of the martyrs' blood and mothers' tears be
      utterly lost in the dust of the earth, not buying Heaven with
      their price?
  And when Man bursts his mortal bounds, is not the Boundless
      revealed that moment?



LXXXV

THE SONG OF THE DEFEATED

My Master has bid me while I stand at the roadside, to sing the
song of Defeat, for that is the bride whom He woos in secret.

She has put on the dark veil, hiding her face from the crowd, but
the jewel glows on her breast in the dark.

She is forsaken of the day, and God's night is waiting for her
with its lamps lighted and flowers wet with dew.

She is silent with her eyes downcast; she has left her home
behind her, from her home has come that wailing in the wind.

But the stars are singing the love-song of the eternal to a face
sweet with shame and suffering.

The door has been opened in the lonely chamber, the call has
sounded, and the heart of the darkness throbs with awe because of
the coming tryst.



LXXXVI

THANKSGIVING

Those who walk on the path of pride crushing the lowly life under
their tread, covering the tender green of the earth with their
footprints in blood;

Let them rejoice, and thank thee, Lord, for the day is theirs.

But I am thankful that my lot lies with the humble who suffer and
bear the burden of power, and hide their faces and stifle their
sobs in the dark.

For every throb of their pain has pulsed in the secret depth of
thy night, and every insult has been gathered into thy great
silence.  And the morrow is theirs.

O Sun, rise upon the bleeding hearts blossoming in flowers of the
morning, and the torchlight revelry of pride shrunken to ashes.




THE END










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fruit-Gathering, by Rabindranath Tagore

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRUIT-GATHERING ***

***** This file should be named 6522.txt or 6522.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/6/5/2/6522/

Produced by Chetan K. Jain and Eric Eldred

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.